dress that she knew suited her. She was not alone; all around was that
luxurious setting of idleness that she was used to, and she felt
less wretched than at home. She was not forced to think what she had
to do. Everything would be done of itself. On meeting Betsy coming
toward her in a white gown that struck her by its elegance, Anna
smiled to her just as she always did. Princess Tverskaia was walking
with Tushkevich and a young lady, a relation, who, to the great joy of
her parents in the provinces, was spending the summer with the
fashionable Princess.
  There was probably something unusual about Anna, for Betsy noticed
it at once.
  "I slept badly," answered Anna, looking intently at the footman
who came to meet them, and, as she supposed, brought Vronsky's note.
  "How glad I am you've come!" said Betsy. "I'm tired, and was just
longing to have some tea before they come. You might go," she turned
to Tushkevich, "with Masha, and try the croquet ground over there,
where they've been clipping it. We shall have time to talk a little
over tea, we'll have a cozy chat, eh?" she said in English to Anna,
with a smile, pressing the hand which held a parasol.
  "Yes, especially as I can't stay very long with you. I'm forced to
go on to old Madame Vrede. I've been promising to go for a century,"
said Anna, to whom lying, alien as it was to her nature, had become
not merely simple and natural in society, but a positive source of
satisfaction. Why she said this, which she had not thought of a second
before, she could not have explained. She had said it simply from
the reflection that as Vronsky would not be here, she had better
secure her own freedom, and try to see him somehow. But why she had
spoken of old Hoffraulein Vrede, whom she had to go and see, as she
had to see many other people, she could not have explained; and yet,
as it afterward turned out, had she cudgeled her brains for the most
cunning subterfuge to meet Vronsky, she could have thought of
nothing better.
  "No. I'm not going to let you go for anything," answered Betsy,
looking intently into Anna's face. "Really, if I were not fond of you,
I should feel offended. One would think you were afraid my society
would compromise you.- Tea in the small dining room, please," she
said, half closing her eyes, as she always did when addressing the
footman.
  Taking the note from him, she read it.
  "Alexei is playing us false," she said in French; "he writes that he
can't come," she added, in a tone as simple and natural as though it
could never enter her head that Vronsky could mean anything more to
Anna than a game of croquet. Anna knew that Betsy knew everything,
but, hearing how she spoke of Vronsky before her, she almost felt
persuaded for a minute that she knew nothing.
  "Ah!" said Anna indifferently, as though not greatly interested in
the matter; and she went on, smiling: "How can you or your friends
compromise anyone?"
  This playing with words, this hiding of a secret, had a great
fascination for Anna, as, indeed, it has for all women. And it was not
the necessity of concealment, not the purpose for which the
concealment was contrived, but the process of concealment itself which
attracted her.
  "I can't be more catholic than the Pope," she said. "Stremov and
Liza Merkalova- why, they're the cream of the cream of society.
Besides, they're received everywhere, and I"- she laid special
stress on the I- "have never been strict and intolerant. It's simply
that I haven't the time."
  "No; you don't care, perhaps, to meet Stremov? Let him and Alexei
Alexandrovich tilt at each other in the Committee- that's no affair of
ours. But, in society, he's the most amiable man I know, and an ardent
croquet player. You shall see. And, in spite of his absurd position as
Liza's lovesick swain at his age, you ought to see how he carries
off the absurd position. He's very nice. Don't you know Sappho Stoltz?
Oh, that's a new type- quite new!"
  Betsy went on with all this chatter, yet, at the same time, from her
good-humored, shrewd glance, Anna felt that she partly guessed her
plight, and was hatching something for her benefit. They were in the
little boudoir.
  "I must write to Alexei, though," and Betsy sat down to the table,
scribbled a few lines, and put the note in an envelope. "I'm telling
him to come to dinner. I've one lady extra to dinner with me, and no
man to take her in. Look what I've said- will that persuade him?
Excuse me, I must leave you for a minute. Would you seal it up,
please, and send it off? she said from the door; "I have to give
some directions."
  Without a moment's hesitation, Anna sat down to the table with
Betsy's letter, and, without reading it, wrote below: "It's
essential for me to see you. Come to the Vrede garden. I shall be
there at six o'clock." She sealed it up, and, Betsy coming back, in
her presence handed the note for transmittal.
  At tea, which was brought them on a little tea table in the cool
little drawing room, a cozy chat promised by Princess Tverskaia before
the arrival of her visitors really did come off between the two women.
They criticized the people they were expecting, and the conversation
fell upon Liza Merkalova.
  "She's very sweet, and I always liked her," said Anna.
  "You ought to like her. She raves about you. Yesterday she came up
to me after the races and was in despair at not finding you. She
says you're a real heroine of romance, and that if she were a man
she would do all sorts of mad things for your sake. Stremov says she
does that as it is."
  "But do tell me, please- I never could make it out," said Anna,
after being silent for some time, speaking in a tone that showed she
was not asking an idle question, but that what she was asking was of
greater importance to her than it should have been, "do tell me,
please: what are her relations with Prince Kaluzhsky- Mishka, as
he's called? I've met them so little. What does it mean?"
  Betsy smiled with her eyes, and looked intently at Anna.
  "It's a new mode," she said. "They've all adopted that mode. They've
flung their caps over the windmills. But there are ways and ways of
flinging them."
  "Yes, but precisely what are her relations with Kaluzhsky?"
  Betsy broke into unexpectedly mirthful and irrepressible laughter, a
thing which rarely happened with her.
  "You're encroaching on Princess Miaghkaia's special domain now.
That's the question of an enfant terrible," and Betsy obviously
tried to restrain herself, but could not, and went off into peals of
that infectious laughter peculiar to people who do not laugh often.
"You'd better ask them," she brought out, between tears of laughter.
  "No; you laugh," said Anna, laughing too, in spite of herself,
"but I never could understand it. I can't understand the husband's
role in it."
  "The husband? Liza Merkalova's husband carries her shawl, and is
always ready to be of use. But no one cares to inquire about what is
really going on. You know, in decent society one doesn't talk or think
even of certain details of the toilet. That's how it is in this case."
  "Will you be at Madame Rolandaky's fete?" asked Anna, to change
the conversation.
  "I don't think so," answered Betsy, and, without looking at her
friend, she began filling the little transparent cups with fragrant
tea. Putting a cup before Anna, she took out a thin cigarette, and,
fitting it into a silver holder, she lighted it. "It's like this,
you see: I'm in a fortunate position," she began, quite serious now,
as she took up her cup. "I understand you, and I understand Liza. Liza
now is one of those naive natures that, like children, don't know
what's good and what's bad. Anyway, she didn't comprehend it when
she was very young. And now she's aware that the lack of comprehension
suits her. Now, perhaps, she doesn't know on purpose," said Betsy,
with a subtle smile. "But, anyway, it suits her. The very same
thing, don't you see, may be looked at tragically, and turned into
misery, or it may be looked at simply, and even humorously. Possibly
you are inclined to look at things too tragically."
  "How I should like to know other people just as I know myself!" said
Anna, seriously and dreamily. "Am I worse than other people, or
better? I think I'm worse."
  "Enfant terrible, enfant terrible!" repeated Betsy. "But here they
are."
                             XVIII.

  They heard the sound of steps and a man's voice, then a woman's
voice and laughter, and immediately thereafter there walked in the
expected guests: Sappho Stoltz, and a young man beaming with excess of
health, the so-called Vaska. It was evident that ample supplies of
beefsteak, truffles, and Burgundy were profitable for his health.
Vaska bowed to the two ladies, and glanced at them, but only for one
second. He walked after Sappho into the drawing room, and followed her
about as though he were chained to her, keeping his sparkling eyes
fixed on her as though he wanted to eat her. Sappho Stoltz was a
blonde beauty with black eyes. She walked with smart little steps in
high-heeled shoes, and shook hands with the ladies vigorously, like
a man.
  Anna had never met this new star of fashion, and was struck by her
beauty, the exaggerated extreme to which her dress was carried, and
the boldness of her manners. On her head there was such an echafaudage
of soft, golden hair- her own and false mixed- that her head was equal
in size to the elegantly rounded bust, of which so much was exposed in
front. The impulsive abruptness of her movements was such that at
every step the lines of her knees and the upper part of her legs
were distinctly marked under her dress, and the question involuntarily
rose in one's mind where in the undulating, piled-up mountain of
material at the back the real body of the woman, so small and slender,
so naked in front, and so hidden behind and below, really came to an
end.
  Betsy made haste to introduce her to Anna.
  "Only fancy, we all but ran over two soldiers," she began telling
them at once, using her eyes, smiling and twitching away her train,
which she at first threw too much to one side. "I drove here with
Vaska... Ah, to be sure, you don't know each other." And, mentioning
his surname, she introduced the young man, and, reddening, broke
into a ringing laugh at her mistake- that is, at her having called him
Vaska before a stranger. Vaska bowed once more to Anna, but he said
nothing to her. He addressed Sappho: "You've lost your bet. We got
here first. Pay up," said he, smiling.
  Sappho laughed still more festively.
  "Not just now," said she.
  "It's all one, I'll have it later."
  "Very well, very well. Oh, yes," she turned suddenly to Princess
Betsy: "I am a nice person... I positively forgot it.... I've
brought you a visitor. And here he comes."
  The unexpected young visitor, whom Sappho had brought with her,
and whom she had forgotten, was, however, a personage of such
consequence that, in spite of his youth, both the ladies rose on his
entrance.
  He was a new admirer of Sappho's. Like Vaska, he now dogged her
footsteps.
  Soon after Prince Kaluzhsky arrived, and Liza Merkalova with
Stremov. Liza Merkalova was a thin brunette, with an Oriental, languid
type of face, and charming- as everyone used to say- ineffable eyes.
The tone of her dark dress (Anna immediately observed and
appreciated the fact) was in perfect harmony with her style of beauty.
Liza was as soft and loose as Sappho was tight and shackled.
  But to Anna's taste Liza was far more attractive. Betsy had said
to Anna that she had adopted the pose of an unsophisticated child, but
when Anna saw her she felt this was not the truth. She really was
unsophisticated, spoiled, yet a sweet and irresponsible woman. It is
true that her tone was the same as Sappho's; that, like Sappho, she
had two men, one young and one old, tacked on to her, and devouring
her with their eyes. But there was something in her higher than her
surroundings. There was in her the glow of the real diamond among
paste. This glow shone out in her charming, truly ineffable eyes.
The weary, and at the same time passionate, glance of those eyes,
encircled by dark rings, impressed one by its perfect sincerity.
Everyone looking into those eyes fancied he knew her wholly, and,
knowing her, could not but love her. At the sight of Anna, her whole
face lighted up at once with a smile of delight.
  "Ah, how glad I am to see you!" she said, going up to her.
"Yesterday, at the races, I wanted just to get to you, but you'd
gone away. I did so want to see you, especially yesterday. Wasn't it
awful?" she said, looking at Anna with eyes that seemed to lay bare
all her soul.
  "Yes; I had no idea it would be so thrilling," said Anna, blushing.
  The company got up at this moment to go into the garden.
  "I'm not going," said Liza, smiling and settling herself close to
Anna. "You won't go either, will you? Who wants to play croquet?"
  "Oh, I like it," said Anna.
  "There, how do you manage never to be bored by things? One has but
to look at you, to be joyful. You're alive, but I'm bored."
  "How can you be bored? Why, you live among the merriest people in
Peterburg," said Anna.
  "Possibly the people who are not of our set are even more bored; but
we are not amused ourselves- I certainly am not, but awfully,
awfully bored."
  Sappho, smoking a cigarette, went off into the garden with the two
young men. Betsy and Stremov remained at the tea table.
  "You bored?" said Betsy. "Sappho says they enjoyed themselves
tremendously at your house last night."
  "Ah, how dreary it all was!" said Liza Merkalova. "We all drove back
to my place after the races. And always the same people, always the
same. Always the same thing. We lounged about on sofas all the
evening. What's enjoyable about that? No; do tell me how you manage
never to be bored?" she said, addressing Anna again. "One has but to
look at you and one sees a woman who may be happy or unhappy, but
who isn't bored. Tell me- how do you do it?"
  "I do nothing," answered Anna, blushing at these searching
questions.
  "That's the best way," Stremov put in.
  Stremov was a man of fifty, partly gray, but still vigorous in
appearance, very ugly, but with a characteristic and intelligent face.
Liza Merkalova was his wife's niece, and he spent all his leisure
hours with her. On meeting Anna Karenina, since he was Alexei
Alexandrovich's enemy in the government, he tried, like a shrewd man
and a man of the world, to be particularly cordial with her, the
wife of his enemy.
  "Nothing," he put in with a subtle smile, "that's the very best way.
I told you long ago," he said, turning to Liza Merkalova, "that, in
order not to be bored, you mustn't think you're going to be bored.
Just as you mustn't be afraid of not being able to fall asleep, if
you're afraid of sleeplessness. That's precisely what Anna
Arkadyevna has just said."
  "I should be very glad if I had said it, for it's not only clever
but true," said Anna, smiling.
  "No, do tell me why it is one can't go to sleep, and one can't
help being bored?"
  "To sleep well one should work, and to enjoy oneself one should also
work."
  "What am I to work for when my work is of no use to anybody? And I
can't, and won't, knowingly make a pretense at it."
  "You're incorrigible," said Stremov, without looking at her, and
he spoke again to Anna.
  As he rarely met Anna, he could say nothing but banalities to her,
but he said those banalities, when was she returning to Peterburg, and
how fond Countess Lidia Ivanovna was of her- with an expression
which suggested that he longed with his whole soul to please her,
and show his regard for her- and even more than that.
  Tushkevich came in, announcing that the party were awaiting the
other players to begin croquet.
  "No, don't go away, please don't," pleaded Liza Merkalova, hearing
that Anna was going. Stremov joined in her entreaties.
  "It's too violent a transition," he said, "to go from such company
to old Madame Vrede. And, besides, you will only give her a chance for
talking scandal, while here you will arouse other feelings, of the
finest and directly opposed to scandal," he said to her.
  Anna pondered for an instant in uncertainty. This shrewd man's
flattering words, the naive, childlike affection shown her by Liza
Merkalova, and all the worldly atmosphere she was used to- it was
all so easy, while that which was in store for her was so difficult,
that she was for a minute in uncertainty: should she remain, should
she put off a little longer the painful moment of explanation? But,
remembering what was in store for her when she would be alone at home,
if she did not come to some decision; remembering that gesture-
terrible even in memory- when she had clutched her hair in both hands,
she said good-by and went away.
                             XIX.

  In spite of Vronsky's apparently frivolous life in society, he was a
man who hated disorder. In early youth, in the Corps of Pages, he
had experienced the humiliation of a refusal, when he had tried, being
in difficulties, to borrow money, and since then he had never once put
himself in the same position again.
  In order to keep his affairs in some sort of order, he was wont,
about five times a year (more or less frequently, according to
circumstances), to shut himself up alone and put all his affairs
into definite shape. This he would call his day of washing up or faire
la lessive.
  On waking up late in the morning after the races, Vronsky put on a
white linen coat, and, without shaving or taking his bath, he
distributed about the table money, bills, and letters, and set to
work. Petritsky, who knew he was ill-tempered on such occasions, on
waking up and seeing his comrade at the writing table, quietly dressed
and went out without getting in his way.
  Every man who knows to the minutest details all the complexity of
the conditions surrounding him, cannot help imagining that the
complexity of these conditions, and the difficulty of making them
clear, is something exceptional and personal, peculiar to himself, and
never supposes that others are surrounded by just as complicated an
array of personal affairs as he is. So indeed it seemed to Vronsky.
And not without inward pride, and not without reason, he thought
that any other man would long ago have been in difficulties, and would
have been forced to some dishonorable course, if he had found
himself in such a difficult position. But Vronsky felt that now
especially it was essential for him to clear up and define his
position if he were to avoid getting into difficulties.
  What Vronsky attacked first, as being the easiest, was his pecuniary
position. Writing out on note paper in his minute handwriting all that
he owed, he added up the amount and found that his debts amounted to
seventeen thousand and some odd hundreds, which he left out for the
sake of clearness. Reckoning up his cash and the balance in his
bankbook, he found that he had left one thousand eight hundred
roubles, and nothing coming in before the New Year. Reckoning over
again his list of debts, Vronsky copied it, dividing it into three
classes. In the first class he put the debts which he would have to
pay at once, or for which he must in any case have the money ready
so that on demand for payment there would not be a moment's delay in
paying. Such debts amounted to about four thousand: one thousand
five hundred for a horse, and two thousand five hundred as surety
for a young comrade, Venevsky, who had lost that sum to a
cardsharper in Vronsky's presence. Vronsky had wanted to pay the money
at the time (he had that amount then), but Venevsky and Iashvin had
insisted that they would pay and not Vronsky, who had not played. So
far, so good; but Vronsky knew that in this dirty business, though his
only share in it was undertaking by word of mouth to be surety for
Venevsky, it was absolutely necessary for him to have the two thousand
five hundred roubles, so as to be able to fling it at the cheat, and
have no more words with him. And so, for this first and most important
division, he must have four thousand roubles. The second class-
eight thousand roubles- consisted of less important debts. These
were principally accounts owing in connection with his race horses, to
the purveyor of oats and hay, the Englishman, the saddler, and so
on. He would have to pay some two thousand roubles on these debts too,
in order to be quite free from anxiety. The last class of debts- to
shops, to hotels, to his tailor- were such as need not be
considered. So that he needed at least six thousand roubles, and he
only had one thousand eight hundred for current expenses. For a man
with one hundred thousand roubles of revenue, which was what
everyone fixed as Vronsky's income, such debts, one would suppose,
could hardly be embarrassing; but the fact was that he was far from
having one hundred thousand. His father's immense property, which
alone yielded a yearly income of two hundred thousand, was left
undivided between the brothers. At the time when the elder brother,
with a mass of debts, had married Princess Varia Chirkova, the
daughter of a Dekabrist without any fortune whatever, Alexei had given
up to his elder brother almost the whole income from his father's
estate, reserving for himself only twenty-five thousand a year from
it. Alexei had said at the time to his brother that the sum would be
sufficient for him until he married, which he would probably never do.
And his brother, who was in command of one of the most expensive
regiments, and was only just married, could not decline the gift.
His mother, who had her own separate property, had allowed Alexei
every year twenty thousand in addition to the twenty-five thousand
he had reserved, and Alexei had spent it all. Of late his mother,
incensed with him on account of his love affair and his leaving
Moscow, had given up sending him the money. And, in consequence of
this, Vronsky, who had been in the habit of living on the scale of
forty-five thousand a year, having only received twenty thousand
that year, now found himself in difficulties. To get out of these
difficulties, he could not apply to his mother for money. Her last
letter, which he had received the day before, had particularly
exasperated him by the hints it contained that she was quite ready
to help him to succeed in the world and in the army, but not to lead a
life which scandalized all good society. His mother's attempt to buy
him stung him to the quick and made him feel colder than ever toward
her. But he could not draw back from the generous word when it was
once uttered, even though he felt now, vaguely foreseeing certain
eventualities in his liaison with Madame Karenina, that his generous
word had been spoken thoughtlessly, and that, even though he were
not married, he might need all the hundred thousand of income. But
it was impossible to draw back. He had only to recall his brother's
wife, to remember how that sweet, delightful Varia sought, at every
convenient opportunity, to remind him that she remembered his
generosity and appreciated it, to grasp the impossibility of taking
back his gift. It was as impossible as beating a woman, or stealing,
or lying. One thing only could and ought to be done, and Vronsky
determined upon it without an instant's hesitation: to borrow money
from a moneylender, ten thousand roubles, a proceeding which presented
no difficulty; to cut down his expenses generally, and to sell his
race horses. Resolving on this, he promptly wrote a note to Rolandaky,
who had more than once sent to him with offers to buy horses from him.
Then he sent for the Englishman and the moneylender, and divided
what money he had according to the accounts he intended to pay. Having
finished this business, he wrote a cold and cutting answer to his
mother. Then he took out of his notebook three notes of Anna's, read
them again, burned them, and, remembering their conversation on the
previous day, he sank into deep thought.
                             XX.

  Vronsky's life was particularly happy in that he had a code of
principles, which defined with unfailing certitude what he ought and
what he ought not to do. This code of principles covered only a very
small circle of contingencies, but then the principles were never
doubtful, and Vronsky, as he never went outside that circle, had never
had a moment's hesitation about doing what he ought to do. These
principles laid down as invariable rules: that one must pay a
cardsharper, but need not pay a tailor; that one must never tell a lie
to a man, but one may to a woman; that one must never cheat anyone,
but one may a husband; that one must never pardon an insult, but one
may give one and so on. These principles were possibly not
reasonable and not good, but they were of unfailing certainty, and, so
long as he adhered to them, Vronsky felt that his heart was at peace
and he could hold his head up. But of late, in regard to his relations
with Anna, Vronsky had begun to feel that his code of principles did
not fully cover all possible contingencies, and to foresee in the
future difficulties and perplexities for which he could find no
guiding clue.
  His present relation to Anna and to her husband was to his mind
clear and simple. It was clearly and precisely defined in the code
of principles by which he was guided.
  She was an honorable woman who had bestowed her love upon him, and
he loved her, and therefore she was in his eyes a woman who had a
right to the same respect, or even more, than a lawful wife. He
would have had his hand chopped off before he would have allowed
himself by a word, by a hint, to humiliate her, or even to fall
short of the fullest respect a woman could look for.
  His attitude toward society, too, was clear. Everyone might know,
might suspect it, but no one might dare to speak of it. If any did
speak, he was ready to force all who might do so to be silent and to
respect the nonexistent honor of the woman he loved.
  His attitude to the husband was the clearest of all. From the moment
that Anna loved Vronsky, he had regarded his own right over her as the
one thing unassailable. Her husband was simply a superfluous and
tiresome person. No doubt he was in a pitiable position, but how could
that be helped? The one thing the husband had a right to was to demand
satisfaction with a weapon in his hand, and Vronsky was prepared for
this at any minute.
  But of late new inner relations had arisen between her and him,
which frightened Vronsky by their indefiniteness. Only the day
before she had told him that she was with child. And he felt that this
fact, and what she expected of him, called for something not fully
defined in that code of principles by which he had hitherto steered
his course in life. And he had been indeed caught unawares, and, at
the first moment when she spoke to him of her position, his heart
had prompted him to beg her to leave her husband. He had said that,
but now, thinking things over he saw clearly that it would be better
to manage avoiding that; and at the same time, as he told himself
this, he was afraid whether such an avoidance were not wrong.
  "If I told her to leave her husband, it would mean uniting her
life with mine; am I prepared for that? How can I take her away now,
when I have no money? Supposing I could arrange... But how can I
take her away while I'm in the service? If I say it, I ought to be
prepared to do it; that is, I ought to have the money and to retire
from the army."
  And he grew thoughtful. The question whether to retire from the
service or not brought him to the other, and perhaps the chief
though hidden, interest of his life, of which none knew but he.
  Ambition was the old dream of his youth and childhood, a dream which
he did not confess even to himself, though it was so strong that now
this passion was even doing battle with his love. His first steps in
the world and in the service had been successful, but two years before
he had made a great mistake. Anxious to show his independence, and for
the sake of advancement, he had refused a post that had been offered
him, hoping that this refusal would heighten his value; but it
turned out that he had been too bold, and he was passed over. And
having, whether he liked or not, taken up for himself the position
of an independent man, he carried it off with great tact and good
sense, behaving as though he bore no grudge against anyone, nor
regarding himself as injured in any way, and caring for nothing but to
be left alone since he was enjoying himself. In reality he had
ceased to enjoy himself as long ago as the year before, when he had
gone to Moscow. He felt that this independent attitude of a man who
might have done anything, but cared to do nothing, was already
beginning to pall, that many people were beginning to fancy that he
was not really capable of anything but being a straightforward,
good-natured fellow. His connection with Madame Karenina, by
creating so much sensation and attracting general attention, had given
him a fresh distinction, which had soothed his gnawing worm of
ambition for a while; but a week ago that worm had been roused up
again with fresh force. The friend of his childhood, a man of the same
set, of the same coterie, his comrade in the Corps of Pages,
Serpukhovskoy, who had left school with him, and had been his rival in
class, in gymnastics, in their scrapes and their dreams of glory,
had come back a few days before from Central Asia, where he had gained
two steps up in rank, and an order rarely bestowed upon generals so
young.
  As soon as he arrived in Peterburg, people began to talk about him
as a newly risen star of the first magnitude. A schoolfellow of
Vronsky's and of the same age, he was a general and was expecting a
command which might have influence on the course of political
events; while Vronsky, though he was independent and brilliant, and
beloved by a charming woman, was simply a cavalry captain who was
readily allowed to be as independent as ever he liked. "Of course, I
don't envy Serpukhovskoy and never could envy him; but his advancement
shows me that one has only to watch one's opportunity, and the
career of a man like me may be very rapidly made. Three years ago he
was in just the same position as I am. If I retire, I burn my ships.
If I remain in the army, I lose nothing. She said herself she did
not wish to change her position. And with her love I cannot feel
envious of Serpukhovskoy." And, slowly twirling his mustaches, he
got up from the table and walked about the room. His eyes shone
particularly brightly, and he felt in that firm, calm, and happy frame
of mind which always came after he had thoroughly faced his
position. Everything was straight and clear, just as after former days
of striking balances. He shaved, took a cold bath, dressed, and went
out.
                             XXI.

  "I've come to fetch you. Your lessive lasted a good time today,"
said Petritsky. "Well, is it over?"
  "It's over," answered Vronsky, smiling with his eyes only, and
twirling the tips of his mustaches as circumspectly as though after
the perfect order into which his affairs had been brought any overbold
or rapid movement might disturb it.
  "You're always just as if you'd come out of a bath after it," said
Petritsky. "I've come from Gritzka" (that was what they called the
colonel);- "you're expected there."
  Vronsky, without answering, looked at his comrade, thinking of
something else.
  "Yes; is that music at his place?" he said, listening to the
familiar bass sounds of trumpets, of polkas and waltzes, floating
across to him. "What's the fete?"
  "Serpukhovskoy's come."
  "Aha!" said Vronsky. "Why, I didn't know."
  The smile in his eyes gleamed more brightly than ever.
  Having once made up his mind that he was happy in his love, that
he sacrificed his ambition to it- at any rate, having taken up this
role- Vronsky was incapable of feeling either envious of
Serpukhovskoy, or vexed at him for not having come to him first upon
coming to the regiment. Serpukhovskoy was a good friend, and he was
delighted he had come.
  "Ah, I'm very glad!"
  The colonel, Demin, had taken a large country house. The whole party
was on the wide lower balcony. In the courtyard the first objects that
met Vronsky's eyes were a band of singers in short white linen
jackets, standing near a barrel of vodka, and the robust, good-humored
figure of the colonel surrounded by officers. He had gone out as far
as the first step of the balcony and was loudly shouting to drown
out the band playing an Offenbach quadrille, waving his arms and
giving some orders to a few soldiers standing on one side. A group
of soldiers, a quartermaster, and several subalterns came up to the
balcony with Vronsky. The colonel returned to the table, went out
again on the steps with a tumbler in his hand, and proposed the toast,
"To the health of our former comrade, the gallant general, Prince
Serpukhovskoy. Hurrah!"
  The colonel was followed by Serpukhovskoy, who came out on the steps
smiling, with a glass in his hand.
  "You always get younger, Bondarenko," he said to the rosy-cheeked,
smart-looking sergeant standing just before him, still
youngish-looking though doing his second term of service.
  It was three years since Vronsky had seen Serpukhovskoy. He looked
more robust, had let his whiskers grow, but was still the same
graceful creature, whose face and figure were even more striking
from their fineness and nobility than their beauty. The only change
Vronsky detected in him was that subdued, continual beaming which
settles on the faces of men who are successful and are sure of the
recognition of their success by everyone. Vronsky knew that radiant
air, and immediately observed it in Serpukhovskoy.
  As Serpukhovskoy came down the steps he saw Vronsky. A smile of
pleasure lighted up his face. He tossed his head upward and waved
the glass in his hand, greeting Vronsky, and showing him by the
gesture that he could not come to him before kissing the sergeant
who stood craning forward his lips ready to be kissed.
  "Here he is!" shouted the colonel. "Iashvin told me you were in
one of your gloomy tempers."
  Serpukhovskoy kissed the moist, fresh lips of the brave sergeant,
and, wiping his mouth with his handkerchief, walked up to Vronsky.
  "How glad I am!" he said, squeezing his hand and drawing him to
one side.
  "You look after him," the colonel shouted to Iashvin, pointing to
Vronsky; and he went down below to the soldiers.
  "Why weren't you at the races yesterday? I expected to see you
there," said Vronsky, scrutinizing Serpukhovskoy.
  "I did go, but late. I beg your pardon," he added, and turned to the
adjutant: "Please have this distributed from me, each man as much as
it comes to."
  And he hurriedly took three notes for a hundred roubles each from
his pocketbook, and blushed.
  "Vronsky! Have a bite or a drink?" asked Iashvin. "Hi, something for
the Count to eat! There- drink that."
  The spree at the colonel's lasted a long while.
  There was a great deal of drinking. They swung Serpukhovskoy and
tossed him in the air. Then they did the same to the colonel. Then, to
the accompaniment of the band, the colonel himself danced with
Petritsky. Then the colonel, who began to show signs of weakening, sat
down on a bench in the courtyard and began demonstrating to Iashvin
the superiority of Russia over Prussia, especially in cavalry
attack, and there was a lull in the revelry for a moment.
Serpukhovskoy went into the house to the bathroom to wash his hands
and found Vronsky there- Vronsky was sousing his head with water. He
had taken off his coat and put his red hairy neck under the tap, and
was rubbing it and his head with his hands. When he had finished,
Vronsky sat down by Serpukhovskoy. They both sat down in the
bathroom on a lounge, and a conversation began which was very
interesting to both of them.
  "I've always been hearing about you through my wife," said
Serpukhovskoy. "I'm glad you've been seeing her pretty often."
  "She's friendly with Varia, and they're the only women in
Peterburg I care about seeing," answered Vronsky, smiling. He smiled
because he foresaw the topic the conversation would turn to, and he
was glad of it.
  "The only ones?" Serpukhovskoy queried, smiling.
  "Yes; and I heard news of you, but not only through your wife," said
Vronsky, checking Serpukhovskoy's hint by assuming a stern expression.
"I was greatly delighted to hear of your success, but not a bit
surprised. I expected even more."
  Serpukhovskoy smiled. Such an opinion of him was obviously agreeable
to him, and he did not think it necessary to conceal it.
  "Well, I, on the contrary, expected less- I'll own up frankly. But
I'm glad, very glad. I'm ambitious- that's my weakness, and I
confess to it."
  "Perhaps you wouldn't confess to it if you hadn't been
successful," said Vronsky.
  "I don't suppose so," said Serpukhovskoy, smiling again. "I won't
say life wouldn't be worth living without it, but it would be dull. Of
course I may be mistaken, but I fancy I have a certain capacity for
the line I've chosen, and that if there is to be power of any sort
in my hands, it will be better than in the hands of a good many people
I know," said Serpukhovskoy, with beaming consciousness of success;
"and so the nearer I get to it, the better pleased I am."
  "Perhaps that is true for you, but not for everyone. I used to think
so too, but now I see and think life worth living not only for that."
  "There it comes! there it comes!" said Serpukhovskoy laughing. "Ever
since I heard about you, about your refusal, I began... Of course, I
approved of what you did. But there are ways of doing everything.
And I think your action was good in itself, but you didn't do it in
quite the way you should have done."
  "What's done can't be undone, and you know I never go back on what
I've done. And, besides, I'm very well off."
  "Very well off- for the time. But you're not satisfied with that.
I wouldn't say this to your brother. He's a charming child, like our
host here. There he goes!" he added, listening to the roar of a
"hurrah!"- "and he's happy; that does not satisfy you."
  "I didn't say it did."
  "Yes, but that's not the only thing. Such men as you are wanted."
  "By whom?"
  "By whom? By society, by Russia. Russia needs men, she needs a
party, or else everything goes and will go to the dogs."
  "How do you mean? Bertenev's party against the Russian communists?"
  "No," said Serpukhovskoy, frowning with vexation at being
suspected of such an absurdity. "Tout ca est une blague. That has
always been, and always will be. There are no communists. But
intriguing people have to invent a noxious, dangerous party. It's an
old trick. No, what's wanted is a powerful party of independent men,
like you and me."
  "But why so?" Vronsky mentioned a few men who were in power. "Why
aren't they independent men?"
  "Simply because they have not, or have not had from birth, an
independent fortune, they've not had a name, they weren't born close
to the sun as we were. They can be bought either by money or by favor.
And they have to find a support for themselves in inventing a trend.
And they bring forward some notion, some trend that they don't believe
in, that does harm; and the whole policy is really only a means to a
house at the expense of the crown and so much income. Cela n'est pas
plus fin que ca, when you get a peep at their cards. I may be inferior
to them, more stupid perhaps, though I don't see why I should be
inferior to them. But you and I have one important, certain
advantage over them, in being more difficult to buy. And such men
are more needed than ever."
  Vronsky listened attentively, but he was not so much interested by
the meaning of the words as by the attitude of Serpukhovskoy, who
was already contemplating a struggle with the existing powers, and
already had his likes and dislikes in that world, while his own
interest in his service did not go beyond the interests of his
squadron. Vronsky felt, too, how powerful Serpukhovskoy might become
through his unmistakable faculty for thinking things out and for
taking things in, through his intelligence and gift of eloquence, so
rarely met with in the world in which he moved. And, ashamed as he was
of the feeling, he felt envious.
  "Still I haven't the one thing of paramount importance for that," he
answered; "I haven't the desire for power. I had it once, but it's
gone."
  "Excuse me, that's not true," said Serpukhovskoy smiling.
  "Yes, it's true, it's true- now to be truthful!" Vronsky added.
  "Yes, it's true now, that's another thing; but that now won't last
forever."
  "Perhaps," answered Vronsky.
  "You say perhaps," Serpukhovskoy went on, as though guessing his
thoughts, "but I say for certain. And that's what I wanted to see
you for. Your action was just what it should have been. I see that,
but you ought not to persevere in it. I only ask you to give me
carte blanche. I'm not going to offer you my protection.... Though,
indeed, why shouldn't I protect you?- you've protected me often
enough! I should hope our friendship rises above all that sort of
thing. Yes," he said, smiling to him as tenderly as a woman, "give
me carte blanche, retire from the regiment, and I'll get you in
imperceptibly."
  "But you must understand that I want nothing," said Vronsky, "except
to leave things just as they were."
  Serpukhovskoy got up and stood facing him.
  "You said, leave things just as they were. I understand what that
means. But listen: we're the same age, you've known a greater number
of women perhaps than I have." Serpukhovskoy's smile and gestures told
Vronsky that he mustn't be afraid, that he would be tender and careful
in touching the sore place. "But I'm married, and believe me, in
getting to know one's wife thoroughly, if one loves her, as someone
has said, one gets to know all women better than if one knew thousands
of them."
  "We're coming directly!" Vronsky shouted to an officer, who looked
into the room and called them to the colonel.
  Vronsky was longing now to hear Serpukhovskoy to the end, and know
what he would say to him.
  "And here's my opinion for you. Women are the chief stumbling
block in a man's career. It's hard to love a woman and do anything.
There's only one way of having love conveniently without its being a
hindrance- that's marriage. Now, how am I to tell you what I mean?"
said Serpukhovskoy, who liked similes. "Wait, wait a minute! Yes, just
as you can only carry a fardeau yet do something with your hands
when the fardeau is tied on your back- and that's marriage. And that's
what I felt when I was married. My hands were suddenly set free. But
if you drag that fardeau about with you without marriage, your hands
will always be so full that you can do nothing. Look at Mazankov, at
Krupov. They've ruined their careers for the sake of women."
  "What women!" said Vronsky, recalling the Frenchwoman and the
actress with whom the two men he had mentioned were connected.
  "The firmer the woman's footing in society, the worse it is.
That's much the same as not merely carrying the fardeau in your
arms, but tearing it away from someone else."
  "You have never loved," Vronsky said softly, looking straight before
him and thinking of Anna.
  "Perhaps. But you remember what I've said to you. And another thing-
women are all more materialistic than men. We make something immense
out of love, but they are always terre-a-terre."
  "Directly, directly!" he cried to a footman who came in. But the
footman had not come to call them again, as he supposed. The footman
brought Vronsky a note.
  "A man brought it from Princess Tverskaia."
  Vronsky opened the letter, and flushed crimson.
  "My head's begun to ache; I'm going home," he said to Serpukhovskoy.
  "Oh, good-by then. You give me carte blanche!"
  "We'll talk about it later on; I'll look you up in Peterburg."
                             XXII.

  It was six o'clock already, and so, in order to be there quickly,
and at the same time not to drive with his own horses, known to
everyone, Vronsky got into Iashvin's hackney coach and told the
coachman to drive as quickly as possible. It was a roomy,
old-fashioned coach, with seats for four. He sat in one corner,
stretched his legs out on the front seat, and sank into deep thought.
  A vague sense of the clearness to which his affairs had been
brought, a vague recollection of the friendliness and flattery of
Serpukhovskoy, who had considered him a man who was needed, and,
most of all, the anticipation of the meeting before him- all blended
into a general, joyous sense of life. This feeling was so strong
that he could not help smiling. He dropped his legs, crossed one leg
over the other knee, and, taking it in his hand, felt the springy
muscle of the calf, where it had been grazed the day before by his
fall, and, leaning back he drew several deep breaths.
  "I'm happy, very happy!" he said to himself. He had often before had
this sense of physical joy in his own body, but he had never felt so
fond of himself, of his own body, as at that moment. He enjoyed the
slight ache in his strong leg, he enjoyed the muscular sensation of
movement in his chest as he breathed. The bright, cold August day,
which had made Anna feel so hopeless, seemed to him keenly
stimulating, and refreshed his face and neck that still tingled from
the cold water. The scent of brilliantine on his mustaches struck
him as particularly pleasant in the fresh air. Everything he saw
from the carriage window, everything in that cold pure air, in the
pale light of the sunset, was as fresh, and gay, and strong as he
was himself: the roofs of the houses shining in the rays of the
setting sun, the sharp outlines of fences and angles of buildings, the
figures of passers-by and carriages that met him now and then, the
motionless green of the trees and grass, the fields with evenly
drawn furrows of potatoes, and the slanting shadows that fell from the
houses, and trees, and bushes, and even from the rows of potatoes-
everything was bright like a pretty landscape freshly painted and
varnished.
  "Get on, get on!" he said to the driver, putting his head out of the
window, and pulling a three-rouble note out of his pocket he handed it
to the man as he looked round. The driver's hand fumbled with
something at the lamp, the whip cracked, and the coach rolled
rapidly along the smooth highroad.
  "I want nothing, nothing but this happiness," he thought, staring at
the bone button of the bell in the space between the windows, and
picturing to himself Anna just as he had seen her last time. "And as I
go on, I love her more and more. Here's the garden of the Vrede's
crown villa. Whereabouts will she be? Where? How? Why did she fix on
this place to meet me, and why does she write in Betsy's letter?" he
thought, now for the first time wondering at it. But there was now
no time for wonder. He called to the driver to stop before reaching
the avenue, and opening the door, jumped out of the carriage as it was
moving, and went up the avenue that led to the house. There was no one
in the avenue; but, looking round to the right, he caught sight of
her. Her face was hidden by a veil, but he drank in with glad eyes the
special movement in walking, peculiar to her alone, the slope of her
shoulders, and the setting of her head, and at once a sort of electric
shock ran all over him. With fresh force he felt conscious of himself,
from the springy movements of his legs to the movements of his lungs
as he breathed, and something set his lips twitching.
  Joining him, she pressed his hand tightly.
  "You're not angry because I sent for you? I absolutely had to see
you," she said; and the serious and set line of her lips, which he saw
under the veil, transformed his mood at once.
  "I angry? But how have you come- where?"
  "Never mind," she said, laying her hand on his arm, "come along, I
must talk to you."
  He saw that something had happened, and that the interview would not
be a joyous one. In her presence he had no will of his own: without
knowing the grounds of her distress, he already felt the same distress
unconsciously passing over him.
  "What is it? What?" he asked her, squeezing her hand with his elbow,
and trying to read her thoughts in her face.
  She walked on a few steps in silence, gathering up her courage; then
suddenly she stopped.
  "I did not tell you yesterday," she began, breathing quickly and
painfully, "that coming home with Alexei Alexandrovich I told him
everything... told him I could not be his wife, that... and told him
everything."
  He heard her, unconsciously bending his whole figure down to her
as though hoping in this way to soften the hardness of her position
for her. But directly she had said this he suddenly drew himself up,
and a proud and hard expression came over his face.
  "Yes, yes, that's better, a thousand times better! I know how
painful it was," he said. But she was not listening to his words-
she was reading his thoughts from the expression of his face. She
could not guess that that arose from the first idea that presented
itself to Vronsky- that a duel was now inevitable. The idea of a
duel had never crossed her mind, and so she put a different
interpretation on this passing expression of hardness.
  When she got her husband's letter, she knew then at the bottom of
her heart that everything would go on in the old way, that she would
not have the strength of will to forego her position, to abandon her
son, and to join her lover. The morning spent at Princess
Tverskaia's had confirmed her still more in this. But this interview
was still of the utmost gravity for her. She hoped that this interview
would transform her position, and save her. If on hearing this news he
were to say to her resolutely, passionately, without an instant's
wavering: "Throw up everything and come with me! she would give up her
son and go away with him. But this news had not produced on him the
effect she had expected; he simply seemed resentful of some affront.
  "It was not in the least painful for me. It happened of itself," she
said irritably, "and see..." She pulled her husband's letter out of
her glove.
  "I understand, I understand," he interrupted her, taking the letter,
but not reading it, and trying to soothe her. "The one thing I
longed for, the one thing I prayed for, was to cut short this
position, so as to devote my life to your happiness."
  "Why do you tell me that?" she said. "Do you suppose I can doubt it?
If I doubted..."
  "Who's that coming?" said Vronsky suddenly, pointing to two ladies
walking toward them. "Perhaps they know us!" and he hurriedly turned
off, drawing her after him into a side path.
  "Oh, I don't care!" she said. Her lips were quivering. And he
fancied that her eyes looked with strange fury at him from under her
veil. "I tell you that's not the point- I can't doubt that; but see
what he writes me. Read it." She stood still again.
  Again, just as at the first moment of hearing of her rupture with
her husband, Vronsky, on reading the letter, was unconsciously carried
away by the natural sensation aroused in him by his own relation to
the injured husband. Now, while he held his letter in his hands, he
could not help picturing the challenge, which he would most likely
find at home today or tomorrow, and the duel itself, in which, with
the same cold and haughty expression that his face was assuming at
this moment, he would await the injured husband's shot, after having
himself fired into the air. And at that instant there flashed across
his mind the thought of what Serpukhovskoy had just said to him, and
what he had himself been thinking in the morning- that it was better
not to bind himself; and he knew that he could not tell her this
thought.
  Having read the letter, he raised his eyes to her, and there was
no firmness in them. She saw at once that he had been thinking about
it before by himself. She knew that whatever he might say to her, he
would not say all he thought. And she knew that her last hope had
failed her. This was not what she had been looking for.
  "You see the sort of man he is," she said, with a shaking voice;
"he..."
  "Forgive me, but I rejoice at it," Vronsky interrupted. "For God's
sake, let me finish!" he added, his eyes imploring her to give him
time to explain his words. "I rejoice, because things cannot, cannot
possibly remain as he supposes."
  "Why can't they?" Anna said, restraining her tears, and obviously
attaching no sort of consequence to what he said. She felt that her
fate was sealed.
  Vronsky meant that after the duel- inevitable, he thought- things
could not go on as before, but he said something different.
  "It can't go on. I hope that now you will leave him. I hope"- he was
confused, and reddened- "that you will let me arrange and plan our
life. Tomorrow..." he was beginning.
  She did not let him go on.
  "But my child!" she shrieked. "You see what he writes! I should have
to leave him, and I can't and won't do that."
  "But, for God's sake, which is better? To leave your child, or
keep up this degrading situation?"
  "To whom is it degrading?"
  "To all, and most of all to you."
  "You say degrading... Don't say that. These words have no meaning
for me," she said in a shaking voice. She did not want him now to
say what was untrue. She had nothing left her but his love, and she
wanted to love him. "Don't you understand that from the day I loved
you everything has changed for me? For me there is one thing, and
one thing only- your love. If that's mine, I feel so exalted, so
strong, that nothing can be degrading to me. I am proud of my
position, because... proud of being... proud..." She could not say
what she was proud of. Tears of shame and despair choked her
utterance. She stood still and sobbed.
  He felt, too, something swelling in his throat and twitching in
his nose, and for the first time in his life he felt on the point of
weeping. He could not have said exactly what it was touched him so; he
felt sorry for her, and he felt he could not help her, and with that
he knew  that he was to blame for her wretchedness, and that he had
done something wrong.
  "Isn't a divorce possible?" he said feebly. She shook her head,
without answering. "Couldn't you take your son, and still leave him?
  "Yes; but it all depends on him. Now I must go to him," she said
shortly. Her presentiment that all would again go on in the old way
had not deceived her.
  "On Tuesday I shall be in Peterburg, and everything can be settled."
  "Yes," she said. "But don't let us talk any more of it."
  Anna's carriage, which she had sent away, and ordered to come back
to the little gate of the Vrede garden, drove up. Anna said good-by to
Vronsky, and drove home.
                             XXIII.

  On Monday there was the usual session of the Commission of the 2nd
of June. Alexei Alexandrovich walked into the hall where the session
was held, greeted the members and the president, as usual, and sat
down in his place, putting his hand on the papers laid ready before
him. Among those papers lay the necessary evidence and a rough outline
of the speech he intended to make. But he did not really need these
documents. He remembered every point, and did not think it necessary
to go over in his memory what he would say. He knew that when the time
came, and when he saw his enemy facing him, and studiously endeavoring
to assume an expression of indifference, his speech would flow of
itself better than he could prepare it now. He felt that the import of
his speech was of such magnitude that every word of it would have
weight. Meantime, as he listened to the usual report, he had the
most innocent and inoffensive air. No one, looking at his white hands,
with their swollen veins and long fingers, so softly stroking the
edges of the white paper that lay before him, and at the air of
weariness with which his head drooped on one side, would have
suspected that in a few minutes a torrent of words would flow from his
lips that would arouse a fearful storm, set the members shouting and
attacking one another, and force the president to call for order. When
the report was over, Alexei Alexandrovich announced in his subdued,
delicate voice that he had several points to bring before the
meeting in regard to the organization of the native tribes. All
attention was turned upon him. Alexei Alexandrovich cleared his
throat, and, without looking at his opponent, but selecting, as he
always did while he was delivering his speeches, the first person
sitting opposite him, an inoffensive little old man, who never had
an opinion of any sort in the Commission, began to expound his
views. When he reached the point about the basic and organic law,
his opponent jumped up and began to protest. Stremov, who was also a
member of the Commission, and was also stung to the quick, began
defending himself, and an altogether stormy session followed; but
Alexei Alexandrovich triumphed, and his motion was carried, three
new commissions were appointed, and the next day, in a certain
Peterburg circle, nothing else was talked of but this session.
Alexei Alexandrovich's success had been even greater than he had
anticipated.
  Next morning, Tuesday, Alexei Alexandrovich, on awaking, recollected
with pleasure his triumph of the previous day, and he could not help
smiling, though he tried to appear indifferent, when the head clerk,
anxious to flatter him, informed him of the rumors that had reached
him concerning what had happened in the Commission.
  Absorbed in business with the head clerk, Alexei Alexandrovich had
completely forgotten that it was Tuesday, the day fixed by him for the
return of Anna Arkadyevna, and he was surprised and received a shock
of annoyance when a servant came in to inform him of her arrival.
  Anna had arrived in Peterburg early in the morning; the carriage had
been sent to meet her in accordance with her telegram, and so Alexei
Alexandrovich might have known of her arrival. But, when she
arrived, he did not meet her. She was told that he had not yet gone
out, but was busy with the head clerk. She sent word to her husband
that she had come, went to her own room, and occupied herself in
sorting out her things, expecting he would come to her. But an hour
passed; he did not come. She went into the dining room on the
pretext of giving some directions, and spoke loudly on purpose,
expecting him to come out there; but he did not come, though she heard
him go to the door of his study as he parted from the head clerk.
She knew that he should before long go out to his office as usual, and
she wanted to see him before that, so that their attitude to one
another might be defined.
  She walked across the drawing room and went resolutely to him.
When she went into his study he was in official uniform, obviously
ready to go out, sitting at a little table on which he rested his
elbows, looking dejectedly before him. She saw him before he saw
her, and she knew that he was thinking of her.
  On seeing her, he would have risen, but changed his mind, then his
face flushed hotly- a thing Anna had never seen before, and he got
up quickly and went to meet her, looking not at her eyes, but above
them, at her forehead and hair. He went up to her, took her by the
hand, and asked her to sit down.
  "I am very glad you have come," he said, sitting down beside her,
and, obviously wishing to say something, he stuttered. Several times
he attempted to speak, but stopped. In spite of the fact, that in
preparing herself for meeting him, she had schooled herself to despise
and accuse him, she did not know what to say to him, and she felt pity
for him. And so the silence lasted rather long: "Is Seriozha quite
well?" he said, and, without waiting for an answer, he added: "I
shan't be dining at home today, and I must go out directly."
  "I had thought of going to Moscow," she said.
  "No, you did quite, quite right to come," he said, and was silent
again.
  Seeing that he was powerless to begin the conversation, she began
herself.
  "Alexei Alexandrovich," she said, looking at him and without
dropping her eyes under his persistent gaze at her hair, "I'm a guilty
woman, I'm a bad woman, yet I am the same as I was, as I told you
then, and I have come to tell you that I can change nothing."
  "I haven't asked you about that," he said, all at once, resolutely
and with hatred looking her straight in the face; "that was as I had
supposed." Under the influence of anger he apparently regained
complete possession of all his faculties. "But as I told you then, and
have written to you," he said in a thin, shrill voice, "I repeat
now, that I am not bound to know this. I ignore it. Not all wives
are so kind as you, to be in such a hurry to communicate such
agreeable news to their husbands." He laid special emphasis on the
word "agreeable." "I shall ignore it so long as the world knows
nothing of it, so long as my name is not disgraced. And so I simply
inform you that our relations must be just as they have always been,
and that only in the event of your compromising yourself I shall be
obliged to take steps to secure my honor."
  "But our relations cannot be the same as always," Anna began in a
timid voice, looking at him with dismay.
  When she saw once more those composed gestures, heard that shrill,
childlike and sarcastic voice, her aversion for him extinguished her
pity for him, and she felt only afraid; but at all costs she wanted to
make clear her position.
  "I cannot be your wife while I..." she began.
  He laughed a cold and malignant laugh.
  "The manner of life you have chosen is reflected, I suppose, in your
ideas. I have so much of both respect and contempt- I respect your
past and despise your present- that I was far from the
interpretation you put on my words."
  Anna sighed and bowed her head.
  "Though indeed I fail to comprehend how, with the independence you
show," he went on, getting hot, "announcing your infidelity to your
husband and seeing nothing reprehensible in it, apparently, you can
see anything reprehensible in performing a wife's duties in relation
to your husband."
  "Alexei Alexandrovich! What is it you want of me?"
  "I want never to meet that man here, and I want you to conduct
yourself so that neither society, nor the servants, could possibly
reproach you.... I want you not to see him. That's not much, I
think. And in return you will enjoy all the privileges of a faithful
wife without fulfilling her duties. That's all I have to say to you.
Now it's time for me to go. I'm not dining at home." He got up and
moved toward the door.
  Anna got up too. Bowing in silence, he let her pass before him.
                             XXIV.

  The night spent by Levin on the haycock did not pass without an
effect upon him. The way in which he had been managing his land
revolted him and lost all attraction for him. In spite of the
magnificent harvest, never had there been (or, at least, it had
never seemed so to him) so many hindrances and so many quarrels
between him and the peasants as that year, and the origin of these
failures and this hostility was now perfectly comprehensible to him.
The delight he had experienced in the work itself, and the
consequent greater intimacy with the peasants, the envy he felt of
them, of their life, the desire to adopt that life, which had been
to him that night not a dream but an intention, the execution of which
he had thought out in detail- all this had so transformed his view
of the farming of the land as he had managed it, that he could not
take his former interest in it, and could not help seeing that
unpleasant relation between him and the workpeople which was the
foundation of it all. The herd of improved cows such as Pava, the
whole land plowed over and enriched, the nine level fields
surrounded with willow fences, the ninety dessiatinas heavily manured,
drill plows, and all the rest of it- it was all splendid, if only
the work had been done by himself, or by himself and his comrades,
by people in sympathy with him. But he saw clearly now (his work on
a book of agriculture, in which the chief element in husbandry was
to have been the laborer, greatly assisted him in this) that the
sort of farming he was carrying on was nothing but a cruel and
stubborn struggle between him and the laborers, in which there was
on one side- his side- a continual intense effort to change everything
to a pattern he considered better; on the other side, the natural
order of things. And in this struggle he saw that, with immense
expenditure of force on his side, and with no effort or even intention
on the other side, the sole attainment was that the work did not go to
the liking of either side, and that splendid tools, splendid cattle
and land were spoiled with no good to anyone. Worst of all, the energy
expended on this work was not merely wasted. He could not help feeling
now, since the meaning of his system had become clear to him, that the
aim of his energy was a most unworthy one. In reality, what was the
struggle about? He was struggling for every groat (and he could not
help it, for he had only to relax his efforts, and he would not have
had the money to pay his laborers' wages), while they were only
struggling to be able to do their work easily and agreeably- that is
to say, as they were used to doing it. It was for his interests that
every laborer should work as hard as possible, and that while doing so
he should keep his wits about him, so as to try not to break the
winnowing machines, the horse rakes, the threshing machines, that he
should attend to what he was doing. What the laborer wanted was to
work as pleasantly as possible, with rests, and, above all, carelessly
and heedlessly, without thinking. That summer Levin saw this at
every step. He sent the men to mow some clover for hay, picking out
the worst patches where the clover was overgrown with grass and
weeds and of no use for seed; again and again they mowed his best
dessiatinas of seed clover, justifying themselves by the pretext
that the bailiff had told them to, and trying to pacify him with the
assurance that it would make splendid hay; but he knew that it was
because those dessiatinas were so much easier to mow. He sent out a
hay machine for pitching the hay- it was broken at the first row
because it was dull work for a peasant to sit on the seat in front
with the great wings waving above him. And he was told: "Don't
trouble- sure, the womenfolks will pitch it quick enough." The plows
were practically useless, because it never occurred to the laborer
to raise the colter when he turned the plow, and in forcing it
round, he tortured the horse and spoiled the ground- and then begged
Levin not to mind it. The horses were allowed to stray into the
wheat because not a single laborer wanted to be night watchman, and,
in spite of orders to the contrary, the laborers insisted on taking
turns for night duty about the horses; and when Vanka, after working
all day long, fell asleep, he would say, very penitent for his
fault: "Do what you will to me."
  Three of the best heifers were allowed to overeat themselves to
death, by letting them into the clover aftermath without care as to
drenching them, and nothing would make the men believe that they had
been blown out by the clover, but they told Levin, by way of
consolation, that one of his neighbors had lost a hundred and twelve
head of cattle in three days. All this happened, not because anyone
felt ill will to Levin or to his farming; on the contrary, he knew
that they liked him, thinking him a simple gentleman (their highest
praise); but it happened simply because all they wanted was to work
merrily and carelessly, and his interests were not only remote and
incomprehensible to them, but fatally opposed to their most just
claims. Long before, Levin had felt dissatisfaction with his own
position in regard to the land. He saw that his boat leaked, but he
did not look for the leak, perhaps purposely deceiving himself. But
now he could deceive himself no longer. The farming of the land, as he
was managing it, had become not merely unattractive but revolting to
him, and he could take no further interest in it.
  To this now was joined the presence, only thirty verstas off, of
Kitty Shcherbatskaia, whom he longed to see and could not. Darya
Alexandrovna Oblonskaia had invited him, when he was over there, to
come; to come with the object of renewing his proposal to her
sister, who would, so she gave him to understand, accept it now. Levin
himself had felt on seeing Kitty Shcherbatskaia that he had never
ceased to love her; but he could not go over to the Oblonskys',
knowing she was there. The fact that he had proposed to her, and
that she had refused him, had placed an insuperable barrier between
her and him. "I can't ask her to be my wife merely because she can't
be the wife of the man she wanted to marry," he said to himself. The
thought of this made him cold and hostile to her. "I should not be
able to speak to her without a feeling of reproach; I could not look
at her without resentment; and she will only hate me all the more,
as she's bound to. And besides, how can I now, after what Darya
Alexandrovna told me, go to see them? Can I help showing that I know
what she told me? And I shall come to forgive her magnanimously, and
take pity on her! And go through a performance before her of
forgiving, and deigning to bestow my love on her!... Why did Darya
Alexandrovna tell me that? I might have seen her by chance- then
everything would have happened of itself; but, as it is, it's out of
the question- out of the question!"
  Darya Alexandrovna sent him a letter, asking him for a sidesaddle
for Kitty's use. "I'm told you have a sidesaddle," she wrote to him;
"I hope you will bring it over yourself."
  This was more than he could stand. How could a woman of any
intelligence, of any delicacy, put her sister in such a humiliating
position! He wrote ten notes, and tore them all up, and then sent
the saddle without any reply. To write that he would come was
impossible, because he could not come; to write that he could not come
because something prevented him, or that he would be away, would be
still worse. He sent the saddle without any answer; and with a sense
of having done something shameful, he handed over all the now
revolting business of the estate to his bailiff, and set off next
day to a remote district to see his friend Sviiazhsky, who had
splendid marshes for double snipes in his neighborhood, and had lately
written, asking him to keep a long-standing promise to visit him.
The snipe marsh, in the Surovsky district, had long tempted Levin, but
he had continually put off this visit on account of his work on the
estate. Now he was glad to get away from the neighborhood of the
Shcherbatskys, and still more from his farmwork, especially on a
shooting expedition, which always served as the best consolation in
trouble.
                             XXV.

  In the Surovsky district there was neither railway nor mail coach,
and Levin drove there with his own horses in his tarantass.
  He stopped halfway at a well-to-do peasant's to feed his horses. A
bald, well-preserved old man, with a broad, red beard, grizzled on his
cheeks, opened the gate, squeezing against the gatepost to let the
troika pass. Directing the coachman to a place under the shed in the
big, clean, tidy new yard, with charred, wooden plows in it, the old
man asked Levin to come into the room. A cleanly dressed young
housewife, with clogs on her bare feet, was scrubbing the floor in the
new outer room. She was frightened by the dog that ran in after Levin,
and uttered a shriek, but began laughing at her own fright at once
when she was told the dog would not hurt her. Pointing out to Levin
with her bare arm the door into the room, she bent down again,
hiding her handsome face, and went on scrubbing.
  "Would you like a samovar?" she asked.
  "Yes, please."
  The room was a big one, with a tile stove, and a partition
dividing it into two. Under the icons stood a table painted in
patterns, a bench and two chairs. Near the entrance was a dresser full
of crockery. The shutters were closed, there were few flies, and it
was so clean that Levin was anxious that Laska, who had been running
along the road and bathing in puddles, should not muddy the floor, and
ordered her to a place in the corner by the door. After looking
round the room, Levin went out in the back yard. The comely young
housewife in clogs, swinging the empty pails on the yoke, ran on
before him to the well for water.
  "Look sharp, my girl!" the old man shouted after her,
good-humoredly, and he walked up to Levin. "Well, sir, are you going
to Nikolai Ivanovich Sviiazhsky? He comes to us too," he began
chatting, leaning his elbows on the railing of the steps. In the
middle of the old man's account of his acquaintance with Sviiazhsky,
the gates creaked again, and laborers came into the yard from the
fields, with wooden plows and harrows. The horses harnessed to the
plows and harrows were sleek and fat. The laborers were obviously of
the household: two were young men in cotton-print shirts and caps, the
two others were hired laborers in homespun shirts, one an old man, the
other a young fellow.
  Moving off from the steps, the old man went up to the horses and
began unharnessing them.
  "What have they been plowing?" asked Levin.
  "Plowing up the potatoes. We rent a bit of land too. Fedot, don't
let out the gelding, but take it to the trough, and we'll put
another in harness."
  "Oh, father, about the plowshares I ordered- has he brought them
along?" asked the big, robust fellow, obviously the old man's son.
  "There... in the sledge," answered the old man, rolling up the reins
he had taken off, and flinging them on the ground. "You can put them
right, while they have dinner."
  The comely young housewife came into the outer room with the full
pails dragging at her shoulders. More women came on the scene from
somewhere, young and handsome, middle-aged, old and ugly, with
children and without children.
  The samovar was beginning to sing; the laborers and the family,
having disposed of the horses, came in to dinner. Levin, getting his
provisions out of his carriage, invited the old man to take tea with
him.
  "Well, I have had some today already," said the old man, obviously
accepting the invitation with pleasure. "Well, be it so, for company."
  Over their tea Levin heard all about the old man's farming. Ten
years before the old man had rented a hundred and twenty dessiatinas
from the lady who owned them, and a year ago he had bought them and
rented another three hundred from a neighboring landowner. A small
part of the land- the worst part- he let out for rent, while some
forty dessiatinas of arable land he cultivated himself, with his
family and two hired laborers. The old man complained that things were
going badly. But Levin saw that he simply did so from a feeling of
propriety, and that his farm was in a flourishing condition. If it had
been unsuccessful he would not have bought land at a hundred and
five roubles the dessiatina, he would not have married off his three
sons and a nephew, he would not have rebuilt twice after fires, and
each time on a larger scale. In spite of the old man's complaints,
it was evident that he was proud, and justly proud, of his prosperity,
proud of his sons, his nephew, his sons' wives, his horses, and his
cows, and especially of the fact that he was keeping all this
farming going. From his conversation with the old man, Levin
realized he was not averse to new methods either. He had planted a
great many potatoes, and his potatoes, as Levin had seen driving past,
were already past flowering and beginning to ripen, whereas Levin's
were only just coming into flower. He plowed the ground for his
potatoes with a modern plow borrowed from a neighboring landowner.
He sowed wheat. The trifling fact that, thinning out his rye, the
old man used the rye he thinned out for his horses, struck Levin
especially. How many times had Levin seen this splendid fodder wasted,
and tried to get it saved; but always it had turned out to be
impossible. This peasant had done so, and he could not say enough in
praise of it as food for the beasts.
  "What have the wenches to do? They carry it out in bundles to the
roadside, and the cart brings it away."
  "Well, we landowners can't manage well with our laborers," said
Levin, handing him a glass of tea.
  "Thanks," said the old man, and he took the glass, but refused
sugar, pointing to a bit he had left. "There's no getting along with
them," said he. "They're simple waste. Look at Sviiazhsky, for
instance. We know what the land's like- first-rate; yet there's not
much of a crop to boast of. It's not looked after enough- that's all
it is!"
  "But you work your land with hired laborers?"
  "We're all peasants together. We go into everything ourselves. If
a man's no use, he can go, and we can manage by ourselves."
  "Father Finogen wants some tar," said the young woman in the
clogs, coming in.
  "Yes, yes, that's how it is, sir!" said the old man, getting up,
and, crossing himself lingeringly, he thanked Levin and went out.
  When Levin went in the kitchen to call his coachman he saw the whole
family of men at dinner. The women were standing up waiting on them.
The young, robust son was telling something funny, with his mouth full
of buckwheat porridge, and they were all laughing- the woman in the
clogs, who was pouring cabbage soup into a bowl, laughing most merrily
of all.
  Very probably the comely face of the young woman in the clogs had
a good deal to do with the impression of well-being this peasant
household made upon Levin, but the impression was so strong that Levin
could never get rid of it. And all the way from the old peasant's to
Sviiazhsky's he kept recalling this peasant farm as though there
were something in this impression demanding his special attention.
                             XXVI.

  Sviiazhsky was the marshal of his district. He was five years
older than Levin, and had long been married. His sister-in-law, a
young girl Levin liked very much, lived in his house; and Levin knew
that Sviiazhsky and his wife would have greatly liked to marry the
girl to him. He knew this with certainty, as so-called eligible
young men always know it, though he could never have brought himself
to speak of it to anyone; and he also knew that, although he wanted to
get married, and although by every token this very attractive girl
would make an excellent wife, he could no more have married her,
even if he had not been in love with Kitty Shcherbatskaia, than he
could have flown up to the sky. And this knowledge poisoned the
pleasure he had hoped to find in the visit to Sviiazhsky.
  On getting Sviiazhsky's letter with the invitation for shooting,
Levin had immediately thought of this; but, in spite of it, he had
made up his mind that Sviiazhsky's having such views for him was
simply his own groundless supposition, and so he would go,
notwithstanding. Besides, at the bottom of his heart, he had a
desire to try himself, to put himself to the test in regard to this
girl. The Sviiazhskys' home life was exceedingly pleasant, and
Sviiazhsky himself, the best type of Zemstvo man that Levin knew,
was very interesting to him.
  Sviiazhsky was one of those people, always a source of wonder to
Levin, whose convictions, very logical though never original, go one
way by themselves, while their life, exceedingly definite and firm
in its course, goes its way quite apart and almost always in direct
contradiction to their convictions. Sviiazhsky was an extremely
advanced man. He despised the nobility, and believed the mass of the
nobility to be secretly in favor of serfdom, and only concealing their
views out of cowardice. He regarded Russia as a ruined country, rather
after the style of Turkey, and the government of Russia as so bad that
he never permitted himself to criticize its doings seriously, and
yet he was a functionary of that government, and a model marshal of
nobility, and when he drove about he always wore his cap with the
cockade and red band. He considered human life only tolerable
abroad, and went abroad to stay at every opportunity, and at the
same time he carried on a complex and improved system of agriculture
in Russia, and with extreme interest followed everything and knew
everything that was being done in Russia. He considered the Russian
peasant as occupying a stage of development intermediate between the
ape and the man, and at the same time in the days of Zemstvo
election no one was readier to shake hands with the peasants and
listen to their opinion. He believed neither in God nor the devil, but
was much concerned about the question of the improvement of the clergy
and the maintenance of their revenues, and took special trouble to
keep up the church in his village.
  On the woman question he was on the side of the extreme advocates of
complete liberty for women, and especially their right to labor. But
he lived with his wife on such terms that their affectionate,
childless home life was the admiration of everyone, and arranged his
wife's life so that she did nothing and could do nothing but share her
husband's preoccupations in spending their time as happily and as
agreeably as possible.
  If it had not been a characteristic of Levin to put the most
favorable interpretation on people, Sviiazhsky's character would
have presented no doubt or difficulty to him: he would have said to
himself, "a fool or a knave," and everything would have seemed
clear. But he could not say a fool, because Sviiazhsky was
unmistakably clever, and, moreover, a highly cultivated man, who was
exceptionally modest over his culture. There was not a subject he knew
nothing of. But he did not display his knowledge except when he was
compelled to do so. Still less could Levin say that he was a knave, as
Sviiazhsky was unmistakably an honest, goodhearted, sensible man,
who worked good-humoredly, keenly, and perseveringly at his work,
which was held in high honor by everyone about him, and certainly he
had never consciously done, and was indeed incapable of doing,
anything base.
  Levin tried to understand him, and could not understand him, and
looked at him and his life as at a living enigma.
  Levin and he were very friendly, and so Levin used to venture to
sound Sviiazhsky, to try to get at the very foundation of his view
of life; but it was always in vain. Every time Levin tried to
penetrate beyond the outer chambers of Sviiazhsky's mind, which were
hospitably open to all, he noticed that Sviiazhsky was slightly
disconcerted; faint signs of alarm were visible in his eyes, as though
he were afraid Levin would understand him, and he would give him a
kindly, good-humored rebuff.
  Just now, since his disenchantment with farming, Levin was
particularly glad to stay with Sviiazhsky. Apart from the fact that
the sight of this happy and affectionate couple, so pleased with
themselves and everyone else, and their well-ordered home, had
always a cheering effect on Levin, he felt a longing, now that he
was so dissatisfied with his own life, to get at that secret in
Sviiazhsky which gave him such clarity, definiteness, and good courage
in life. Moreover, Levin knew that at Sviiazhsky's he would meet the
landowners of the neighborhood, and it was particularly interesting
for him just now to hear and take part in those rural conversations
concerning crops, laborers' wages, and so on, which, Levin was
aware, are conventionally regarded as something very low, but which
seemed to him just now to constitute the one subject of importance.
"It was not, perhaps, of importance in the days of serfdom, and it may
not be of importance in England. In both cases the conditions of
agriculture are firmly established; but among us now, when
everything has been turned topsy-turvy, and is only just taking shape,
the question what form these conditions will take is the one
question of importance in Russia," thought Levin.
  The shooting turned out to be poorer than Levin expected. The
marsh was dry and there were no snipe at all. He walked about the
whole day and only brought back three birds, but to make up for that
he brought back, as he always did from shooting, an excellent
appetite, excellent spirits, and that keen, intellectual mood which
with him always accompanied violent physical exertion. And while out
shooting, when he seemed to be thinking of nothing at all, the old man
and his family would time and again come to mind, and the impression
of them seemed to claim not merely his attention, but the solution
of some question connected with them.
  In the evening, at tea, two landowners who had come about some
business connected with a wardship were of the party, and the
interesting conversation Levin had been looking forward to sprang up.
  Levin was sitting beside his hostess at the tea table, and was
obliged to keep up a conversation with her and her sister, who was
sitting opposite him. Madame Sviiazhsky was a round-faced,
fair-haired, rather short woman, all smiles and dimples. Levin tried
through her to get at a solution of the weighty enigma her husband
presented to his mind; but he had not complete freedom of ideas,
because he was in an agony of embarrassment. This agony of
embarrassment was due to the fact that the sister-in-law was sitting
opposite to him, in a dress, specially put on, as he fancied, for
his benefit, cut particularly open, in the shape of a trapeze, at
her white bosom. This quadrangular opening, in spite of the bosom's
being very white, or just because it was very white, deprived Levin of
the full use of his faculties. He imagined, probably mistakenly,
that this low-necked bodice had been made on his account, and felt
that he had no right to look at it, and tried not to look at it; but
he felt that he was to blame for the very fact of the low-necked
bodice having been made. It seemed to Levin that he had imposed upon
someone, that he ought to explain something, but that to explain it
was impossible, and for that reason he was continually blushing, was
ill at ease and awkward. His awkwardness infected the pretty
sister-in-law too. But their hostess appeared not to observe this, and
kept purposely drawing her into the conversation.
  "You say," she said, pursuing the subject that had been started,
"that my husband cannot be interested in what's Russian. It's quite
the contrary; he is in cheerful spirits abroad, but never in such as
he is here. Here he feels in his proper place. He has so much to do,
and he has the faculty of interesting himself in everything. Oh,
you've not been to see our school, have you?"
  "I've seen it.... The little house covered with ivy, isn't it?"
  "Yes; that's Nastia's work," she said, indicating her sister.
  "You teach in it yourself?" asked Levin, trying to look above the
open neck, but feeling that no matter where he looked in that
direction he should see it.
  "Yes; I used to teach in it myself, and do teach still, but we
have a first-rate schoolmistress now. And we've started gymnastic
exercises."
  "No, thank you, I won't have any more tea," said Levin, and
conscious of doing a rude thing, but incapable of continuing the
conversation, he got up, blushing. "I hear a very interesting
conversation," he added, and walked to the other end of the table,
where Sviiazhsky was sitting with the two gentlemen of the
neighborhood. Sviiazhsky was sitting sideways, with one elbow on the
table, and a cup in one hand, while with the other hand he gathered up
his beard, held it to his nose and let it drop again, as though he
were smelling it. His brilliant black eyes were looking directly at
the excited country gentleman with gray mustaches, and apparently he
derived amusement from his remarks. The gentleman was complaining of
the peasants. It was evident to Levin that Sviiazhsky knew the
answer to this gentleman's complaints, which would at once demolish
his whole contention, but that in his position he could not give
utterance to this answer, and listened, not without pleasure, to the
landowner's comic talk.
  The gentleman with the gray mustaches was obviously an inveterate
adherent of serfdom and a devoted agriculturist, who had lived all his
life in the country. Levin saw proofs of this in his dress, in his
old-fashioned threadbare coat, obviously not his everyday attire, in
his shrewd, deep-set eyes, in his coherent Russian, in the imperious
tone that had become habitual from long use, and in the resolute
gestures of his large, beautiful sunburned hands, with a single old
wedding ring on his fourth finger.
                             XXVII.

  "If I'd only the heart to throw up what's been set going... such a
lot of trouble wasted... I'd turn my back on the whole business,
sell out, go off like Nikolai Ivanovich... to hear La Belle Helene,"
said the landowner, a pleasant smile lighting up his shrewd old face.
  "But, you see, you don't throw it up," said Nikolai Ivanovich
Sviiazhsky, "so there must be something gained."
  "The only gain is that I live in my own house, neither bought nor
hired. Besides, one keeps hoping the people will learn sense.
Though, instead of that, believe it or not, there is such drunkenness,
such immorality!... They keep making partition of their bits of
land; there isn't a horse or a cow. The peasant's dying of hunger, but
just go and take him on as a laborer- he'll do his best to do you a
mischief, and then bring you up before the justice of the peace."
  "But then, you make complaints to the justice too," said Sviiazhsky.
  "I lodge complaints? Not for anything in the world There's so much
talk springs up that one is sorry ever to have complained. At the
works, for instance, they pocketed the advance money and made off.
What did the justice do? Why, acquitted them. Nothing keeps them in
order but their own communal court and their village elder. He'll flog
them in the good old style! But for that there'd be nothing for it but
to give it all up and run away."
  Obviously the landowner was chaffing Sviiazhsky, who, far from
resenting it, was apparently amused by it.
  "But, you see, we manage our land without such extreme measures,"
said he, smiling: "Levin, and I, and this gentleman."
  He indicated the other landowner.
  "Yes, the thing's done at Mikhail Petrovich's, but ask him how
it's done. Do you call that a rational system?" said the landowner,
obviously rather proud of the word "rational".
  "My system's very simple," said Mikhail Petrovich, "thank God. All
my management rests on getting the money ready for the autumn
taxes.... The peasants come to me, 'Father, master, help us!' Well,
the peasants are all one's neighbors; one feels for them. So one
advances them a third, but one says: 'Remember, lads, I have helped
you, and you must help me when I need it- whether it's the sowing of
the oats, or the hay cutting, or the harvest'; and well, one agrees,
so much for each taxpayer- though there are dishonest ones among
them too, it's true."
  Levin, who had long been familiar with these patriarchal methods,
exchanged glances with Sviiazhsky and interrupted Mikhail Petrovich,
turning again to the gentleman with the gray mustaches.
  "Well, what do you think?" he asked. "What system is one to adopt
nowadays?"
  "Why, manage like Mikhail Petrovich, or let the land for half the
crop or for rent to the peasants; one can do that- only that's just
how the general prosperity of the country is being ruined. Where the
land with serf labor and good management gave a yield of nine to
one, on the metayage system it yields three to one. Russia has been
ruined by the emancipation!"
  Sviiazhsky looked with smiling eyes at Levin, and even made a
faint gesture of irony to him; but Levin did not think the landowner's
words absurd; he understood them better than he did Sviiazhsky. A
great deal more of what the landowner said to show in what way
Russia was ruined by the emancipation struck him indeed as very
true, new to him, and quite incontestable. The landowner
unmistakably spoke his own individual thought- a thing that rarely
happens- and a thought to which he had been brought not by a desire of
finding some exercise for an idle brain, but a thought which had grown
up out of the conditions of his life, which he had brooded over in the
solitude of his village, and had considered in every aspect.
  "The point is, don't you see, that progress of every sort is only
made by the use of authority," he said, evidently wishing to show he
was not without culture. "Take the reforms of Peter, of Catherine,
of Alexander. Take European history. And progress in agriculture
more than anything else- the potato, for instance, that was introduced
among us by force. The wooden plow, too, wasn't always used. It was
introduced in the days of appanaged princes, perhaps, but it was
probably brought in by force. Now, in our own day, we landowners in
the serf times used various improvements in our husbandry: drying
machines and threshing machines, and carting manure, and all the
modern implements- all these we brought into use by our authority, and
the peasants opposed it at first, and ended by imitating us. Now, by
the abolition of serfdom, we have been deprived of our authority;
and so our husbandry, where it had been raised to a high level, is
bound to sink to the most savage, primitive condition. That's how I
see it."
  "But why so? If it's rational, you'll be able to keep up the same
system with hired labor," said Sviiazhsky.
  "We've no power over them. With whom am I going to work the
system, allow me to ask?"
  "There it is- the labor force- the chief element in agriculture,"
thought Levin.
  "With laborers."
  "The laborers won't work well, and won't work with good
implements. Our laborer can do nothing but get drunk, like a swine,
and then ruin everything you give him. He spoils the horses by
watering unseasonably, he cuts good harness, barters the tires of
the wheels for drink, drops bits of iron into the threshing machine,
so as to break it. He loathes the sight of anything that's not after
his fashion. And that's how the whole level of husbandry has fallen.
Lands gone out of cultivation, overgrown with weeds, or divided
among the peasants, and where millions of chetverts were raised you
get a hundred thousand; the wealth of the country has decreased. If
the same thing had been done, but with consideration for..."
  And he proceeded to unfold his own scheme of emancipation by means
of which these drawbacks might have been avoided.
  This did not interest Levin, but, when he had finished, Levin went
back to his first position, and, addressing Sviiazhsky, and trying
to draw him into expressing his serious opinion, said:
  "It's perfectly true that the standard of culture is falling, and
that with our present relations to the peasants there is no
possibility of farming on a rational system to yield a profit," said
he.
  "I don't believe it," Sviiazhsky replied quite seriously; "all I see
is that we don't know how to cultivate the land, and that our system
of agriculture in the serf days was by no means too high, but too low.
We have no machines, no good stock, no efficient supervision; we don't
even know how to keep accounts. Ask any landowner; he won't be able to
tell you which crop's profitable, and which isn't."
  "Italian bookkeeping," said the landowner ironically. "You may
keep your books as you like, but if they spoil everything for you,
there won't be any profit."
  "Why do they spoil things? A poor threshing machine, or your Russian
presser, they will break, but my steam press they don't break. A
wretched Russian nag they'll ruin, but keep good percherons or the
Russian wagon horses- they won't ruin them. And so it is all round. We
must raise our farming to a higher level."
  "Oh, if one only had the means to do it, Nikolai Ivanovich! It's all
very well for you; but for me, with a son to keep at the university,
lads to be educated at the high school- how am I going to buy these
percherons?"
  "Well, that's what the banks are for."
  "To get whatever I have left sold by auction? No, thank you."
  "I don't agree that it's necessary or possible to raise the level of
agriculture still higher," said Levin. "I devote myself to it, and I
have means, but I can do nothing. As to the banks, I don't know to
whom they're any good. For my part, anyway, whatever I've spent
money on in the way of husbandry has been a loss: stock- a loss,
machinery- a loss."
  "That's true enough," the gentleman with the gray mustaches chimed
in, even laughing with satisfaction.
  "And I'm not the only one," pursued Levin. "I mix with all the
neighboring landowners, who are cultivating their land on a rational
system; they all, with rare exceptions, are doing so at a loss.
Come, tell us how does your land do- does it pay?" said Levin, and
at once in Sviiazhsky's eyes he detected that fleeting expression of
alarm which he had noticed whenever he had tried to penetrate beyond
the outer chambers of Sviiazhsky's mind.
  Moreover, this question on Levin's part was not quite in good faith.
Madame Sviiazhsky had just told him at tea that they had that summer
invited a German expert accountant from Moscow, who for a
consideration of five hundred roubles had investigated the
management of their property, and found that it was costing them a
loss of three thousand odd roubles. She did not remember the precise
sum, but it appeared that the German had worked it out to the fraction
of a kopeck.
  The landowner smiled at the mention of the profits of Sviiazhsky's
farming, obviously aware how much gain his neighbor and marshal was
likely to be making.
  "Possibly it does not pay," answered Sviiazhsky. "That merely proves
that either I'm a bad manager, or that I've sunk my capital for the
increase of my rents."
  "Oh, rent!" Levin cried with horror. "Rent there may be in Europe,
where land has been improved by the labor put into it; but with us all
the land is deteriorating from the labor put into it- in other
words, they're working it out; so there's no question of rent."
  "How- no rent? It's a law."
  "Then we're outside the law; rent explains nothing for us, but
simply muddles us. No, tell me how there can be a theory of rent?..."
  "Will you have some curded milk? Masha, pass us some curded milk
or raspberries." He turned to his wife. "The raspberries are lasting
extraordinarily late this year."
  And in the happiest frame of mind Sviiazhsky got up and walked
off, apparently supposing the conversation to have ended at the very
point when to Levin it seemed that it was only just beginning.
  Having lost his antagonist, Levin continued the conversation with
the landowner, trying to prove to him that all the difficulty arises
from the fact that we don't find out the peculiarities and habits of
our laborer; but the landowner, like all men who think independently
and in isolation, was slow in taking in any other person's thought,
and particularly partial to his own. He stuck to it that the Russian
peasant is a swine and likes swinishness, and that to get him out of
his swinishness one must have authority, and there is none; one must
have the stick, and we have become so liberal that we have all of a
sudden replaced the stick, that served us for a thousand years, with
lawyers and model prisons, where the worthless, stinking peasant is
fed on good soup and has a fixed allowance of cubic feet of air.
  "What makes you think," said Levin, trying to get back to the
question, "that it's impossible to find some relation to the laborer
in which the labor would become productive?"
  "That never could be so with the Russian people; we've no
authority," answered the landowner.
  "How can new conditions be found?" said Sviiazhsky. Having eaten
some curded milk and lighted a cigarette, he came back to the
discussion. "All possible relations to the labor force have been
defined and studied," he said. "The relic of barbarism, the
primitive commune with a guarantee for all, will disappear of
itself; serfdom has been abolished- there remains nothing but free
labor, and its forms are fixed and ready made, and must be adopted.
Permanent hands, day laborers, farmers- you can't get out of those
forms."
  "But Europe is dissatisfied with these forms."
  "Dissatisfied, and seeking new ones. And will find them, in all
probability."
  "That's just what I meant," answered Levin. "Why shouldn't we seek
them for ourselves?"
  "Because it would be just like inventing afresh the means for
constructing railways. They are ready, invented."
  "But if they don't suit us, if they're stupid?" said Levin.
  And again he detected the expression of alarm in the eyes of
Sviiazhsky.
  "Oh, yes; we'll bury the world under our caps! We've found the
secret Europe was seeking for! I've heard all that; but, excuse me, do
you know all that's been done in Europe on the question of the
organization of labor?"
  "No, very little."
  "That question is now absorbing the best minds in Europe. The
Schulze-Delitsch movement.... And then, all this enormous literature
of the labor question, the most liberal Lassalle movement.... The
Mulhausen experiment? That's a fact by now, as you're probably aware."
  "I have some idea of it, but very vague."
  "No, you only say that; no doubt you know all about it as well as
I do. I'm no professor of sociology, of course, but it interested
me, and really, if it interests you, you ought to study it."
  "But what conclusion have they come to?"
  "Excuse me..."
  The two neighbors had risen, and Sviiazhsky, once more checking
Levin in his inconvenient habit of peeping into what was beyond the
outer chambers of his mind, went to see his guests out.
                             XXVIII.

  Levin was insufferably bored that evening with the ladies; he was
stirred as he had never been before by the idea that the
dissatisfaction he was feeling with his system of managing his land
was not an exceptional case, but the general condition of things in
Russia; that the evolving of some relation of the laborers to the soil
which they would work, as with the peasant he had met halfway to the
Sviiazhskys', was not a dream, but a problem which must be solved. And
it seemed to him that the problem could be solved, and that he ought
to try to solve it.
  After saying good night to the ladies, and promising to stay the
whole of the next day, so as to make an expedition on horseback with
them to see an interesting gap in the crown forest, Levin went, before
going to bed, into his host's study to get the books on the labor
question that Sviiazhsky had offered him. Sviiazhsky's study was a
huge room, by bookcases and with two tables in it- one a massive
writing table, standing in the middle of the room, and the other a
round table, covered with recent numbers of reviews and journals in
different languages, ranged like the rays of a star round a lamp. On
the writing table was a stand of drawers marked with gold labels,
and full of papers of various sorts.
  Sviiazhsky took out the books, and sat down in a rocking chair.
  "What are you looking at there?" he said to Levin, who was
standing at the round table looking through the reviews. "Oh, yes,
there's a very interesting article here," said Sviiazhsky, pointing to
the review Levin was holding in his hand. "It appears," he went on,
with eager interest, "that Friedrich was not, after all, the person
chiefly responsible for the partition of Poland. It is proved..."
  And, with his characteristic clearness, he summed up those new, very
important, and interesting revelations. Although Levin was engrossed
at the moment by his ideas about the problem of the land, he wondered,
as he heard Sviiazhsky: "What is there inside of him? And why, why
is he interested in the partition of Poland?" When Sviiazhsky had
finished, Levin could not help asking: "Well, and what then?" But
there was nothing to follow. It was simply interesting that such and
such had been "proved." But Sviiazhsky did not explain, and saw no
need of explaining, why it was interesting to him.
  "Yes, but I was very much interested by your irritable neighbor,"
said Levin, sighing. "He's a clever fellow, and said a lot that was
true."
  "Oh, get along with you! An inveterate supporter of serfdom at
heart, like all of them!" said Sviiazhsky.
  "Whose marshal you are."
  "Yes, only I marshal them in the other direction," said
Sviiazhsky, laughing.
  "I'll tell you what interests me very much," said Levin. "He's right
that our system, that is to say, of rational farming, doesn't
answer; that the only thing that answers is the moneylender system,
like that meek-looking gentleman's, or else the very simplest. Whose
fault is it?"
  "Our own, of course. Besides, it's not true that it doesn't
answer. It answers with Vassilchikov."
  "A factory..."
  "But I really don't know what it is you are surprised at. The people
are at such a low stage of material and moral development, that
obviously they're bound to oppose everything that's necessary to them.
In Europe, a rational system answers because the people are
educated; it follows that we must educate the people- that's all."
  "But how are we to educate the people?"
  "To educate the people three things are needed: schools, and
schools, and schools."
  "But you said yourself the people are at such a low stage of
material development: what help are schools for that?"
  "Do you know, you remind me of the story of the advice given to
the sick man.- You should try purgative medicine. Taken it: worse. Try
leeches. Tried them: worse. Well, then, there's nothing left but to
pray to God. Tried it: worse. That's just how it is with us. I say
political economy; you say- worse. I say socialism- worse.
Education- worse."
  "But how do schools help matters?"
  "They give the peasant fresh wants."
  "Well, that's a thing I've never understood," Levin replied with
heat. "In what way are schools going to help the people to improve
their material position? You say schools, education, will give them
fresh wants. So much the worse, since they won't be capable of
satisfying them. And in what way a knowledge of addition and
subtraction and the catechism is going to improve their material
condition, I never could make out. The day before yesterday I met a
peasant woman in the evening with a little baby, and asked her where
she was going. She said she was going to the wisewoman; her boy had
screaming fits, so she was taking him to be doctored. I asked, 'Why,
how does the wisewoman cure screaming fits?' 'She puts the child on
the hen roost and repeats some charm....'"
  "Well, you're saying it yourself! What's wanted to prevent her
taking her child to the hen roost to cure it of screaming fits is
just..." Sviiazhsky said, smiling good-humoredly.
  "Oh, no!" said Levin with annoyance; "that method of doctoring I
merely meant as a simile for doctoring the people with schools. The
people are poor and ignorant- that we see as surely as the peasant
woman sees the baby has fits because it screams. But in what way
this trouble of poverty and ignorance is to be cured by schools is
as incomprehensible as how the hen roost affects the screaming. What
has to be cured is what makes him poor."
  "Well, in that, at least, you're in agreement with Spencer, whom you
dislike so much. He says, too, that education may be the consequence
of greater prosperity and comfort, of more frequent washing, as he
says, but not of being able to read and write...."
  "Well, then, I'm very glad- or the contrary, very sorry- that I'm in
agreement with Spencer; only I've known it a long while. Schools can
do no good; what will do good is an economic organization in which the
people will become richer, will have more leisure- and then there will
be schools."
  "Still, all over Europe now schools are obligatory."
  "And how far do you agree with Spencer yourself about it?" asked
Levin.
  But there was a gleam of alarm in Sviiazhsky's eyes, and he said
smiling:
  "No; that screaming story is positively capital! Did you really hear
it yourself?"
  Levin saw that he was not to discover the connection between this
man's life and his thoughts. Obviously he did not care in the least
what his reasoning led him to; all he wanted was the process of
reasoning. And he did not like it when the process of reasoning
brought him into a blind alley. That was the only thing he disliked,
and avoided by changing the conversation to something agreeable and
amusing.
  All the impressions of the day, beginning with the impression made
by the old peasant, which served, as it were, as the thorough bass
of all the conceptions and ideas of the day, threw Levin into
violent excitement. This dear good Sviiazhsky, keeping a stock of
ideas simply for public purposes, and obviously having some other
principles hidden from Levin, while with the crowd, whose name is
legion, he guided public opinion by ideas he did not share; that
irascible country gentleman, perfectly correct in the conclusions that
he had been worried into by life, but wrong in his exasperation
against a whole class, and that the best class in Russia; his own
dissatisfaction with the work he had been doing, and the vague hope of
finding a remedy for all this- all was blended in a sense of inward
turmoil, and the anticipation of some solution near at hand.
  Left alone in the room assigned him, lying on a spring mattress,
that yielded unexpectedly at every movement of his arm or his leg,
Levin did not fall asleep for a long while. Not one conversation
with Sviiazhsky, though he had said a great deal that was clever,
had interested Levin; but the conclusions of the irascible landowner
required consideration. Levin could not help recalling every word he
had said, and in imagination amending his own replies.
  "Yes, I ought to have said to him: You say that our husbandry does
not answer because the peasant hates improvements, and that they
must be forced on him by authority. If no system of husbandry answered
at all without these improvements, you would be quite right. But the
only system that does answer is when the laborer is working in
accordance with his habits, just as on the old peasant's land
halfway here. Your and our general dissatisfaction with the system
shows that either we are to blame or the laborers. We have gone our
way- the European way- a long while, without asking ourselves about
the qualities of our labor force. Let us try to look upon the labor
force not as an abstract force but as the Russian mouzhik with his
instincts, and let us arrange our system of agriculture in
accordance with that. Imagine, I ought to have said to him, that you
have the same system as the old peasant has, that you have found means
of making your laborers take an interest in the success of the work,
and have found the happy mean in the way of improvements which they
will admit, and you will, without exhausting the soil, get twice or
three times the yield you got before. Divide it in halves, give half
as the share of labor, the surplus left you will be greater, and
labor's share will be greater too. And to do this one must lower the
standard of husbandry and interest the laborers in its success. How to
do this?- that's a matter of detail; but undoubtedly it can be done."
  This idea threw Levin into a great excitement. He did not sleep half
the night, thinking over in detail the putting of his idea into
practice. He had not intended to go away next day, but he now
determined to go home early in the morning. Besides, the sister-in-law
with her low-necked bodice aroused in him a feeling akin to shame
and remorse for some utterly base action. Most important of all- he
must get back without delay: he would have to make haste to put his
new project to the peasants before the sowing of the winter wheat,
so that the sowing might be undertaken on a new basis. He had made
up his mind to revolutionize his whole system.
                             XXIX.

  The carrying out of Levin's plan presented many difficulties; but he
struggled on, doing his utmost, and attained a result which, though
not what he desired, was enough to enable him, without self-deception,
to believe that the attempt was worth the trouble. One of the chief
difficulties was that the process of cultivating the land was in
full swing, that it was impossible to stop everything and begin it all
again from the beginning, and the machine had to be mended while in
motion.
  When on the evening of his arrival home he informed the bailiff of
his plans, the latter with visible pleasure agreed with what he
said, so long as he was pointing out that all that had been done up to
that time was stupid and useless. The bailiff said that he had said so
a long while ago, but no heed had been paid him. But as for the
proposal made by Levin- to take a part as shareholder with his
laborers in each agricultural undertaking- at this the bailiff
simply expressed a profound despondency, and offered no definite
opinion, but began immediately talking of the urgent necessity of
carrying the remaining sheaves of rye the next day, and of sending the
men out for the second plowing, so that Levin felt that this was not
the time for discussing it.
  On beginning to talk to the peasants about it, and making a
proposition to cede them the land on new terms, he came into collision
with the same great difficulty- that they were so much absorbed by the
current work of the day that they had not time to consider the
advantages and disadvantages of the proposed scheme.
  The simplehearted Ivan, the cowherd, seemed to grasp Levin's
proposal fully- that he should with his family take a share of the
profits of the cattle yard- and he was in complete sympathy with the
plan. But when Levin hinted at the future advantages, Ivan's face
expressed alarm and regret that he could not hear all he had to say,
and he made haste to find himself some task that would admit of no
delay: he either snatched up the fork to pitch the hay out of the
pens, or ran to get water or to clear out the manure.
  Another difficulty lay in the invincible disbelief of the peasants
that a landowner's object could be anything else than a desire to
squeeze all he could out of them. They were firmly convinced that
his real aim (whatever he might say to them) would always be in what
he did not say to them. And they themselves, in giving their
opinion, said a great deal but never said what was their real
object. Moreover (Levin felt that the irascible landowner had been
right) the peasants made their first and unalterable condition of
any agreement whatsoever that they should not be forced to any new
methods of tillage of any kind, nor to use new implements. They agreed
that the modern plow plowed better, that the scarifier did the work
more quickly, but they found thousands of reasons that made it out
of the question for them to use either of them; and though he had
accepted the conviction that he would have to lower the standard of
cultivation, he felt sorry to give up improved methods, the advantages
of which were so obvious. But in spite of all these difficulties he
got his way, and by autumn the system was working, or at least so it
seemed to him.
  At first Levin had thought of giving up the whole farming of the
land just as it was to the peasants, the laborers, and the bailiff, on
new conditions of partnership; but he was very soon convinced that
this was impossible, and determined to divide it up. The cattle
yard, the garden, hayfields, and arable land, divided into several
parts, had to be made into separate lots. The simplehearted cowherd,
Ivan, who, Levin fancied, understood the matter better than any of
them, collecting together a gang of workers to help him, principally
of his own family, became a partner in the cattle yard. A distant part
of the estate, a tract of wasteland that had lain fallow for eight
years, was with the help of the clever carpenter, Fiodor Rezunov,
taken by six families of peasants on new conditions of partnership and
the peasant Shuraev took the management of all the vegetable gardens
on the same terms. The remainder of the land was still worked on the
old system, but these three items were the first step to a new
organization of the whole, and they completely engrossed Levin.
  It is true that in the cattle yard things went no better than
before, and Ivan strenuously opposed warm housing for the cows and
butter made of fresh cream, affirming that cows require less food if
kept cold, and that butter is more profitable made from sour cream,
and he asked for wages just as under the old system, and took not
the slightest interest in the fact that the money he received was
not wages but an advance out of his future share in the profits.
  It is true that Fiodor Rezunov's company did not plow over the
ground twice before sowing, as had been agreed, justifying
themselves on the plea that the time was too short. It is true that
the peasants of the same company, though they had agreed to work the
land on new conditions, always spoke of the land, not as held in
partnership, but as rented for half the crop, and more than once the
peasants and Rezunov himself said to Levin: "If you would take a
rent for the land, it would save you trouble, and we should be more
free." Moreover, the same peasants kept putting off, on various
excuses, the building of a cattle yard and threshing barn on the
land as agreed upon, and delayed doing it till the winter.
  It is true that Shuraev would have liked to let out the kitchen
gardens he had undertaken in small lots to the peasants. He
evidently quite misunderstood, and apparently intentionally
misunderstood, the conditions upon which the land had been given to
him.
  Often, too, talking to the peasants and explaining to them all the
advantages of the plan, Levin felt that the peasants heard nothing but
the sound of his voice, and were firmly resolved, whatever he might
say, not to let themselves be taken in. He felt this especially when
he talked to the cleverest of the peasants, Rezunov, and detected that
gleam in Rezunov's eyes which showed so plainly both ironical
amusement at Levin, and the firm conviction that, if anyone were to be
taken in, it would not be he, Rezunov.
  But in spite of all this Levin thought the system worked, and that
by keeping accounts strictly, and insisting on his own way, he would
prove to them in the future the advantages of the arrangement, and
then the system would go of itself.
  These matters, together with the management of the land still left
on his hands, and the indoor work over his book, so engrossed Levin
the whole summer that he scarcely ever went out shooting. At the end
of August he heard that the Oblonskys had gone away to Moscow- from
their servant, who brought back the sidesaddle. He felt that in not
answering Darya Alexandrovna's letter he had by his rudeness, of which
he could not think without a flush of shame, burned his ships, and
that he would never go to see them again. He had been just as rude
with the Sviiazhskys, leaving them without saying good-by. But he
would never go to see them again either. He did not care about that
now. The business of reorganizing the farming of his land absorbed him
as completely as though there would never be anything else in his
life. He read the books lent him by Sviiazhsky, and ordering from
Moscow what he had not had, he read both the economic and
socialistic books on the subject, but, as he had anticipated, found
nothing bearing on the scheme he had undertaken. In the books on
political economy- in Mill, for instance- whom he studied first with
great ardor, hoping every minute to find an answer to the questions
that were engrossing him, he found laws deduced from the condition
of land culture in Europe; but he did not see why these laws, which
did not apply in Russia, must be general. He saw just the same thing
in the socialistic books: either they were the beautiful but
impracticable fantasies which had fascinated him when he was a
student, or they were attempts at improving, at rectifying the
economic position in which Europe was placed, with which the system of
land tenure in Russia had nothing in common. Political economy told
him that the laws by which the wealth of Europe had been developed,
and was developing, were universal and unvarying. Socialism told him
that development along these lines leads to ruin. And neither of
them gave an answer, or even a hint, in reply to the question as to
what he, Levin, and all the Russian peasants and landowners, were to
do with their millions of hands and millions of dessiatinas, to make
them as productive as possible for the common weal.
  Having once taken the subject up, he read conscientiously everything
bearing on it, and intended in the autumn to go abroad to study land
systems on the spot, in order that he might not on this question be
confronted with what so often met him on various subjects. Often, just
as he was beginning to understand the idea in the mind of anyone he
was talking to, and was beginning to explain his own, he would
suddenly be told: "But Kauffmann, but Jones, but Dubois, but Michelli?
You haven't read them: do read, they've thrashed that question out
thoroughly."
  He saw now distinctly that Kauffmann and Michelli had nothing to
tell him. He knew what he wanted. He saw that Russia had splendid
land, splendid laborers, and that in certain cases, as at the
peasant's on the way to Sviiazhsky's, the produce raised by the
laborers and the land is great- in the majority of cases when
capital is applied in the European way the produce is small, and
that this simply arises from the fact that the laborers want to work
and work well only in their own peculiar way, and that this antagonism
is not incidental but invariable, and has its roots in the national
spirit. He thought that the Russian people whose task it was to
colonize and cultivate vast tracts of unoccupied land, consciously
adhered, till all their land was occupied, to the methods suitable
to their purpose, and that their methods were by no means so bad as
was generally supposed. And he wanted to prove this theoretically in
his book and practically on his land.
                             XXX.

  At the end of September the timber had been carted for building
the cattle yard on the land that had been allotted to the
association of peasants, and the butter from the cows was sold and the
profits divided. In Practice the system worked capitally, or, at
least, so it seemed to Levin. In order to work out the whole subject
theoretically and to complete his book, which, in Levin's daydreams,
was not merely to effect a revolution in political economy, but to
annihilate that science entirely and to lay the foundation of a new
science of the relation of the people to the soil, all that was left
to do was to make a tour abroad, and to study on the spot all that had
been done in the same direction, and to collect conclusive evidence
that all that had been done there was not what was wanted. Levin was
only waiting for the delivery of his wheat to receive the money for it
and go abroad. But the rains began preventing the harvesting of the
corn and potatoes left in the fields, and putting a stop to all
work, even to the delivery of the wheat. The mud was impassable
along the roads; two mills were carried away by the spate, and the
weather got worse and worse.
  On the 30th of September the sun came out in the morning, and,
hoping for fine weather, Levin began making final preparations for his
journey. He gave orders for the wheat to be delivered, sent the
bailiff to the merchant to get the money owing him, and went out
himself to give some final directions on the estate before setting
off.
  Having finished all his business, soaked through with the streams of
water which kept running into his leather coat and down his neck and
his boot tops, but in the keenest and most confident temper, Levin
turned homeward in the evening. The weather had become worse than ever
toward evening; the hail lashed the drenched mare so cruelly that
she went along sideways, shaking her head and ears; but Levin was
all right under his hood, and he looked cheerfully about him at the
muddy streams running under the wheels, at the drops hanging on
every bare twig, at the whiteness of the patch of unmelted
hailstones on the planks of the bridge, at the thick layer of still
succulent, fleshy leaves that lay heaped up about the stripped elm
tree. In spite of the gloominess of nature around him, he felt
peculiarly eager. The talks he had been having with the peasants in
the farther village had shown that they were beginning to get used
to their new position. The innkeeper, an old man, to whose inn he
had gone to get dry evidently approved of Levin's plan, and of his own
accord proposed to enter the partnership for purchasing of cattle.
  "I have only to go on stubbornly toward my aim, and I shall attain
my end," thought Levin; "and it's something to work and take trouble
for. This is not a matter of myself individually, the question of
the public welfare comes into it. The whole system of agriculture, the
chief element in the condition of the people, must be completely
transformed. Instead of poverty- general prosperity and content;
instead of hostility- harmony and unity of interests. In short, a
bloodless revolution, but a revolution of the greatest magnitude,
beginning in the little circle of our district, then the province,
then Russia, and the whole world. Because a just idea cannot but be
fruitful. Yes, it's an aim worth working for. And the fact that it
is I, Kostia Levin, who went to a ball in a black tie, and was refused
by the Shcherbatsky girl, and who is intrinsically such a pitiful,
worthless creature to himself- that proves nothing; I feel sure
Franklin felt just as worthless, and he too had no faith in himself,
thinking of himself as a whole. That means nothing. And he too, most
likely, had an Agathya Mikhailovna to whom he confided his secrets."
  Musing on such thoughts Levin reached home in the darkness.
  The bailiff, who had been to the merchant, had come back and brought
part of the money for the wheat. An agreement had been made with the
old innkeeper, and on the road the bailiff had learned that everywhere
the corn was still standing in the fields, so that his one hundred and
sixty shocks that had not been carried were nothing in comparison with
the losses of others.
  After dinner Levin was sitting, as he usually did, in an easy
chair with a book, and as he read he went on thinking of the journey
before him in connection with his book. Today all the significance
of his book rose before him with special distinctness, and whole
periods ranged themselves in his mind in illustration of his theories.
"I must write that down," he thought. "That ought to form a brief
introduction, which I thought unnecessary before." He got up to go
to his writing table, and Laska, lying at his feet, got up too,
stretching and looking at him as though to inquire where to go. But he
had not time to write it down, for the overseers had come for
receiving orders, and Levin went out into the hall to meet them.
  After giving orders, that is to say, directions about the labors
of the next day, and seeing all the peasants who had business with
him, Levin went back to his study and sat down to work. Laska lay
under the table; Agathya Mikhailovna settled herself in her place with
her stocking.
  After writing for a little while, Levin suddenly thought with
exceptional vividness of Kitty, her refusal, and their last meeting.
He got up and began walking about the room.
  "What's the use of being downhearted?" said Agathya Mikhailovna.
"Come, why do you stay on at home? You ought to go to some warm
springs, especially now that you're ready for the journey."
  "Well, I am going away the day after tomorrow, Agathya
Mikhailovna; I must finish my work."
  "There, there, your work, you say! As if you hadn't done enough
for the peasants! Why, as 'tis, they're saying, 'Your master will be
getting some honor from the Czar for it.' Indeed, 'tis a strange
thing: why need you worry about the peasants?"
  "I'm not worrying about them; I'm doing it for my own good."
  Agathya Mikhailovna knew every detail of Levin's plans for his land.
Levin often put his views before her in all their complexity, and
not uncommonly he argued with her and did not agree with her comments.
But on this occasion she entirely misinterpreted what he had said.
  "Of one's soul's salvation we all know and must think before all
else," she said with a sigh. "Parfion Denissich now, for all he was no
scholar, died a death whose like may God grant to every one of us,"
she said, referring to a servant who had died recently. "Took the
sacrament and all."
  "That's not what I mean," said he. "I mean that I'm acting for my
own advantage. It's all the better for me if the peasants do their
work better."
  "Well, whatever you do, if he's a lazy good-for-naught,
everything'll be at sixes and sevens. If he has a conscience, he'll
work, and if not, there's no doing anything."
  "Oh, come, you say yourself Ivan has begun looking after the
cattle better."
  "All I say is," answered Agathya Mikhailovna, evidently not speaking
at random, but in strict sequence of ideas, "that you ought to get
married- that's what I say."
  Agathya Mikhailovna's allusion to the very subject he had only
just been thinking about hurt and stung him. Levin scowled, and
without answering her, he sat down again to his work, repeating to
himself all that he had been thinking of the real significance of that
work. Only at intervals he listened in the stillness to the click of
Agathya Mikhailovna's needles, and, recollecting what he did not
want to remember, he would frown again.
  At nine o'clock they heard the bell and the faint vibration of a
carriage over the mud.
  "Well, here's visitors come to us, and you won't be dull," said
Agathya Mikhailovna, getting up and going to the door. But Levin
overtook her. His work was not going well now, and he was glad of a
visitor, whoever it might be.
                             XXXI.

  Running halfway down the staircase, Levin caught a sound he knew,
a familiar cough in the hall. But he heard it indistinctly through the
sound of his own footsteps, and hoped he was mistaken. Then he
caught sight of a long, bony, familiar figure, and now it seemed there
was no possibility of mistake; and yet he still went on hoping that
this tall man taking off his fur cloak and coughing was not his
brother Nikolai.
  Levin loved his brother, but being with him was always a torture.
Just now, when Levin, under the influence of the thoughts that had
come to him, and Agathya Mikhailovna's hint, was in a troubled and
uncertain humor, this meeting with his brother which he had to face
seemed particularly difficult. Instead of a lively, healthy visitor,
some outsider who would, he hoped, cheer him up in his uncertain
humor, he had to see his brother, who knew him through and through,
who would call forth all the thoughts nearest his heart, would force
him to show himself fully. And that he was not disposed to do.
  Angry with himself for so base a feeling, Levin ran into the hall;
as soon as he had seen his brother close, this feeling of selfish
disappointment vanished instantly and was replaced by pity. Terrible
as his brother Nikolai had been before in his emaciation and
sickliness, now he looked still more emaciated, still more wasted.
He was a skeleton covered by skin.
  He stood in the hall, jerking his long thin neck, and pulling the
scarf off it, and smiled a strange and pitiful smile. When he saw that
smile, submissive and humble, Levin felt something clutching at his
throat.
  "You see, I've come to you," said Nikolai in a thick voice, never
for one second taking his eyes off his brother's face. "I've been
meaning to a long while, but I've been constantly unwell. Now I'm ever
so much better," he said, rubbing his beard with his big thin hands.
  "Yes, yes!" answered Levin. And he felt still more frightened
when, kissing him, he felt with his lips the dryness of his
brother's skin and saw close to him his big eyes, full of a strange
light.
  A few weeks before, Konstantin Levin had written to his brother that
through the sale of the small part of the property that had remained
undivided, there was a sum of about two thousand roubles to come to
him as his share.
  Nikolai said that he had come now to take his money and, what was
more important, to stay a while in the old nest, to get in touch
with the earth, so as to renew his strength like the heroes of old for
the work that lay before him. In spite of his exaggerated stoop, and
the emaciation that was so striking from his height, his movements
were as rapid and abrupt as ever. Levin led him into his study.
  His brother dressed with particular care- a thing he never used to
do- combed his scanty, lank hair, and, smiling, went upstairs.
  He was in the most affectionate and good-humored mood, just as Levin
often remembered him in childhood. He even referred to Sergei
Ivanovich without rancor. When he saw Agathya Mikhailovna, he joked
with her and asked after the old servants. The news of the death of
Parfion Denissich made a painful impression on him. A look of fear
crossed his face, but he regained his serenity immediately.
  "Of course he was quite old," he said, and changed the subject.
"Well, I'll spend a month or two with you, and then I'm off to Moscow.
Do you know, Miaghkov has promised me a place there, and I'm going
into the service. Now I'm going to arrange my life quite differently,"
he went on. "You know I got rid of that woman."
  "Marya Nikolaevna? Why, what for?"
  "Oh, she was a horrid woman! She caused me all sorts of annoyances."
But he did not say what the annoyances were. He could not say that
he had driven off Marya Nikolaevna because the tea was weak, and,
above all, because she would look after him as though he were an
invalid. "Besides, I want to turn over a new leaf completely now. I've
done silly things, of course, like everyone else, but money's the last
consideration; I don't regret it. So long as there's health- and my
health, thank God, is quite restored."
  Levin listened and racked his brains, but could think of nothing
to say. Nikolai probably felt the same; he began questioning his
brother about his affairs; and Levin was glad to talk about himself,
because then he could speak without hypocrisy. He told his brother
of his plans and his doings.
  His brother listened, but evidently he was not interested.
  These two men were so akin, so near each other, that the slightest
gesture, the tone of voice, told both more than could be said in
words.
  Both of them now had only one thought- the illness of Nikolai and
the nearness of his death- which stifled all else. But neither of them
dared speak of it, and so, whatever they said- without uttering the
one thought that filled their minds- was all falsehood. Never had
Levin been so glad when the evening was over and it was time to go
to bed. Never with any outside person, never on any official visit,
had he been so unnatural and false as he was that evening. And the
consciousness of this unnaturalness, and the remorse he felt at it,
made him even more unnatural. He wanted to weep over his dying, dearly
loved brother, and he had to listen and keep on talking of how he
meant to live.
  As the house was damp, and only the one bedroom had been kept
heated, Levin put his brother to sleep in his own bedroom, behind a
partition.
  His brother got into bed, and whether he slept or did not sleep,
tossed about like a sick man, coughed, and when he could not get his
throat clear, mumbled something. Sometimes when his breathing was
painful, he said, "Oh, my God!" Sometimes when he was choking he
muttered angrily, "Ah, the devil!" Levin could not sleep for a long
while, hearing him. His thoughts were of the most various kinds, but
the end of all his thoughts was the same- death.
  Death, the inevitable end of all, for the first time presented
itself to him with irresistible force. And death, which was here in
this loved brother, groaning half-asleep and from habit calling
without distinction on God and the devil, was not so remote as it
had hitherto seemed to him. It was in himself, too, that he felt this.
If not today, tomorrow; if not tomorrow, in thirty years- wasn't it
all the same? And what was this inevitable death- he did not know, had
never thought about it, and, what was more, had not the power, had not
the courage to think about it.
  "I work, I want to do something, but I had forgotten it must all
end; I had forgotten- death."
  He sat on his bed in the darkness, crouched up, hugging his knees,
and, holding his breath from the strain of thought, he pondered. But
the more intensely he thought, the clearer it became to him that it
was indubitably so, that, in reality, looking upon life, he had
forgotten one little fact- that death will come, and all ends; that
nothing was even worth beginning, and that there was no helping it
anyway. Yes, it was awful, but it was so.
  "But I am alive still. What's to be done now- what's to be done?" he
asked in despair. He lighted a candle, got up cautiously, went to
the looking glass, and began looking at his face and hair. Yes,
there were gray hairs about his temples. He opened his mouth. His back
teeth were beginning to decay. He bared his muscular arms. Yes,
there was strength in them. But Nikolenka, who lay there breathing
with what was left of his lungs, had had a strong, healthy body too.
And suddenly he recalled how they used to go to bed together as
children, and how they only waited till Fiodor Bogdanich was out of
the room to fling pillows at each other and laugh, laugh
irrepressibly, so that even their awe of Fiodor Bogdanich could not
check the effervescing, overbrimming sense of life and happiness. "And
now that warped, hollow chest... And I, not knowing what will become
of me, or wherefore...."
  "K-ha! K-ha! Damnation! Why do you keep fidgeting- why don't you
go to sleep?" his brother's voice called to him.
  "Oh, I don't know; I'm not sleepy."
  "I have had a good sleep, I'm not in a sweat now. Just see, feel
my shirt- there's no sweat, is there?"
  Levin felt it, withdrew behind the partition, and put out the
candle, but for a long while he could not sleep. The question how to
live had hardly begun to grow a little clearer to him, when a new,
insolvable question presented itself- death.
  "Why, he's dying- yes, he'll die in the spring; and how is one to
help him? What can I say to him? What do I know about it? I'd even
forgotten the very fact of it."
                             XXXII.

  Levin had long before made the observation that when one is
uncomfortable with people from their being excessively amenable and
meek, one is apt very soon after to find things intolerable from their
pretensions and irritability. He felt that this was how it would be
with his brother. And his brother Nikolai's gentleness did not, in
fact, last out for long. The very next morning he began to be
irritable, and seemed doing his best to find fault with his brother,
attacking him on his tenderest points.
  Levin felt himself to blame, and could not set things right. He felt
that if they had both not kept up appearances, but had spoken, as it
is called, from the heart- that is to say, had said only just what
they were thinking and feeling- they would simply have looked into
each other's faces, and Konstantin could only have said: "You're
dying, you're dying," and Nikolai could only have answered: "I know
I'm dying, but I'm afraid, I'm afraid, I'm afraid!" And they could
have said nothing more, if they had said only what was in their
hearts. But life like that was impossible, and so Konstantin tried
to do what he had been trying to do all his life, and never could
learn to do, though, as far as he could observe, many people knew so
well how to do it, and without it there was no living at all. He tried
to say what he was not thinking, but he felt continually that it had a
ring of falsehood, that his brother detected him in it, and was
exasperated at it.
  The third day Nikolai induced his brother to explain his plan to him
again, and began not merely attacking it, but intentionally
confounding it with communism.
  "You've simply borrowed an idea that's not your own, but you've
distorted it, and are trying to apply it where it's not applicable."
  "But I tell you there's nothing in common. They deny the justice
of property, of capital, of inheritance, while I do not deny this
chief stimulus." (Levin felt disgusted himself at using such
expressions, but ever since he had been engrossed by his work, he
had unconsciously come more and more frequently to use non-Russian
words.) "All I want is to regulate labor."
  "Which means, you've borrowed an idea, stripped it of all that
gave it its force, and want to make believe that it's something
new," said Nikolai, angrily tugging at his necktie.
  "But my idea has nothing in common..."
  "The other, at any rate," said Nikolai Levin, with an ironical
smile, his eyes flashing malignantly, "has the charm of- what's one to
call it?- geometrical symmetry, of clearness, of definiteness. It
may be a Utopia. If one once allows the possibility of making all
the past a tabula rasa- no property, no family- then labor would
organize itself. But you have nothing..."
  "Why do you mix things up? I've never been a communist."
  "But I have, and I consider it's premature, but rational, and it has
a future, just like Christianity in its first ages."
  "All that I maintain is that the labor force ought to be
investigated from the point of view of natural science; that is to
say, it ought to be studied, its qualities ascertained..."
  "But that's an utter waste of time. That force finds a certain
form of activity of itself, according to the stage of its development.
There have been slaves first, everywhere; then metayers; and we have
the metayage system, rent, and day laborers. What are you trying to
find?"
  Levin suddenly lost his temper at these words, because at the bottom
of his heart he was afraid that it was true- true that he was trying
to hold the balance even between communism and the familiar forms, and
that this was hardly possible.
  "I am trying to find means of working productively for myself and
for the laborers. I want to organize..." he answered hotly.
  "You don't want to organize anything; it's simply the same as you've
been all your life- you want to be original, to pose as not simply
exploiting the peasants, but with some idea in view."
  "Oh, all right, that's what you think- and let me alone!" answered
Levin, feeling the muscles of his left cheek twitching uncontrollably.
  "You've never had, and never have, convictions; all you want is to
please your vanity."
  "Oh, very well; let me alone then!"
  "And I will let you alone! And it's high time I did, and go to the
devil with you! And I'm very sorry I ever came!"
  In spite of all Levin's efforts to soothe his brother afterward,
Nikolai would listen to nothing he said, declaring that it was
better to part, and Konstantin saw that it was simply a case of life
being unbearable to him.
  Nikolai was just getting ready to go, when Konstantin went in to him
again and begged him, rather unnaturally, to forgive him if he had
hurt his feelings in any way.
  "Ah, generosity!" said Nikolai, and he smiled. "If you want to be
right, I can give you that satisfaction. You're in the right; but
I'm going all the same."
  It was only just at parting that Nikolai kissed him, and said,
looking with sudden strangeness and seriousness at his brother:
  "Anyway, don't remember evil against me, Kostia!" and his voice
quavered.
  These were the only words that had been spoken sincerely between
them. Levin knew that those words meant, "You see, and you know,
that I'm in a bad way, and maybe we shall never see each other again."
Levin knew this, and the tears gushed from his eyes. He kissed his
brother once more, but he could not speak, and knew not what to say.
  Two days after his brother's departure, Levin too set off for his
foreign tour. Happening to meet Shcherbatsky, Kitty's cousin, in the
railway train, Levin greatly astonished him by his depression.
  "What's the matter with you?" Shcherbatsky asked him.
  "Oh, nothing; there's not much happiness in life."
  "Not much? You come with me to Paris instead of to Mulhouse. You
shall see how to be happy."
  "No, I've done with it all. It's time I was dead."
  "Well, that's a good one!" said Shcherbatsky, laughing, "why, I'm
only just getting ready to begin."
  "Yes, I thought the same not long ago, but now I know I shall soon
be dead."
  Levin said what he had genuinely been thinking of late. He saw
nothing but death, or an approach to death in everything. But his
cherished scheme only engrossed him the more. Life had to be got
through somehow, till death did come. Darkness had fallen upon
everything for him; but just because of this darkness he felt that the
one guiding clue in the darkness was his work, and he clutched it, and
clung to it with all his strength.
                         PART FOUR

                             I.

  The Karenins, husband and wife, continued living in the same
house, met every day, but were complete strangers to one another.
Alexei Alexandrovich made it a rule to see his wife every day, so that
the servants might have no grounds for suppositions, but avoided
dining at home. Vronsky was never at Alexei Alexandrovich's house, but
Anna saw him away from home, and her husband was aware of it.
  The position was one of torture for all three; and not one of them
would have been equal to enduring this position for a single day,
had it not been for the expectation that it would change, that it
was merely a temporary painful difficulty which would pass over.
Alexei Alexandrovich hoped that this passion would pass, as everything
does pass, that everyone would forget about it, and his name would
remain unsullied. Anna, on whom the position depended, and for whom it
was more poignant than for any other, endured it because she not
merely hoped, but firmly believed, that it would all very soon be
settled and come right. She had not the least idea what would settle
the situation, but she firmly believed that something would now very
soon turn up. Vronsky unaccountably followed her lead, hoping too that
something, independent of him, would be sure to clear up all
difficulties.
  In the middle of the winter Vronsky spent a very tiresome week. A
foreign Prince, who had come on a visit to Peterburg, was put under
his charge, and he had to show him the sights worth seeing. Vronsky
was of distinguished appearance; he possessed, moreover, the art of
behaving with respectful dignity, and was used to having to do with
such grand personages- that was how he came to be put in charge of the
Prince. But he felt his duties to be very irksome. The Prince was
anxious to miss nothing about which he would be asked at home: Had
he seen this and that in Russia? And on his own account he was anxious
to enjoy to the utmost all Russian forms of amusement. Vronsky was
obliged to be his guide in satisfying both these inclinations. The
mornings they spent driving to look at places of interest: the
evenings they passed enjoying the national amusements. The prince
enjoyed a health exceptional even among Princes. By gymnastics and
careful attention to his person he had brought himself to such a point
that in spite of his excesses in pleasure he looked as fresh as a big,
glossy, green Dutch cucumber. The Prince had traveled a great deal,
and considered one of the chief advantages of modern facilities of
communication the accessibility of the pleasures of all nations. He
had been in Spain, and there had indulged in serenades, and had made
friends with a Spanish girl who played the mandolin. In Switzerland he
had killed chamois. In England he had galloped in a red coat over
hedges and killed two hundred pheasants on a bet. In Turkey he had got
into a harem; in India he had traveled on an elephant; and now, in
Russia, he wished to taste all the peculiarly Russian forms of
pleasure.
  Vronsky, who was, as it were, chief master of the ceremonies to him,
was at great pains to distribute all the Russian amusements
suggested by various persons to the Prince. They had race horses,
and Russian pancakes and bear hunts, and troikas, and gypsy
choruses, and drinking orgies, with the Russian accompaniment of
broken crockery. And the Prince, with surprising ease, fell in with
the Russian spirit; he smashed trays full of crockery, sat with a
gypsy girl on his knee, and seemed to be asking: What more? Or does
the whole Russian spirit consist in just this?
  In reality, of all the Russian entertainments the Prince liked
best French actresses, a ballet dancer, and white-seal champagne.
Vronsky was used to Princes, but, either because he had himself
changed of late, or that he was in too close proximity to the
Prince, that week seemed fearfully wearisome to him. The whole of that
week he experienced unceasingly a sensation such as a man might have
who has been put in charge of a dangerous madman, who is afraid of the
madman, and, at the same time, from being with him, fears for his
own reason. Vronsky was continually conscious of the necessity of
never for a second relaxing the tone of stern official respectfulness,
so that he might not himself be insulted. The Prince's manner of
treating the very people who, to Vronsky's surprise, were ready to
descend to any depths to provide him with Russian amusements, was
contemptuous. His criticisms of Russian women, whom he wished to
study, more than once made Vronsky crimson with indignation. The chief
reason why the Prince was so particularly disagreeable to Vronsky
was that he could not help seeing himself in him. And what he saw in
this mirror did not gratify his self-esteem. He was a very stupid
and a very self-satisfied and a very healthy and a very well-washed
man, and nothing else. He was a gentleman, it was true, and Vronsky
could not deny it. He was equable and not cringing with his superiors,
was free and ingratiating in his behavior with his equals, and was
contemptuously indulgent with his inferiors. Vronsky was himself the
same, and regarded it as a great merit to be so. But to this Prince he
was an inferior, and his contemptuous and indulgent attitude to him
revolted him.
  "Brainless beef! Can I be like that?" he reflected.
  Be that as it might, when, on the seventh day, he parted from the
Prince, who was starting for Moscow, and received his thanks, he was
happy to be rid of his uncomfortable position and the unpleasant
reflection of himself. He said good-by to him at the station, on their
return from a bear hunt, at which they had had a display of Russian
derring-do kept up all night.
                             II.

  When he got home, Vronsky found there a note from Anna. She wrote:
"I am ill and unhappy. I cannot come out, yet cannot go on longer
without seeing you. Come in this evening. Alexei Alexandrovich goes to
the Council at seven and will be there till ten." After a minute's
reflection on the strangeness of her bidding him come straight to her,
in spite of her husband's insisting on her not receiving him, he
decided to go.
  Vronsky had that winter got his promotion, was now a colonel, had
left the regiment, and was living alone. After having some lunch, he
lay down on the sofa immediately, and in five minutes memories of
the hideous scenes he had witnessed during the last few days were
jumbled and joined to a mental image of Anna and of the peasant, one
of the encompassing people, who had played an important part in the
bear hunt, and Vronsky fell asleep. He waked up in the dark, trembling
with horror, and made haste to light a candle. "What was it? What?
What was the dreadful thing I dreamed? Yes, yes; the peasant bear
hunter, I think; a little dirty man with a disheveled beard was
stooping down doing something, and all of a sudden he began saying
some strange words in French. Yes, there was nothing else in the
dream," he said to himself. "But why was it so awful?" He vividly
recalled the peasant again and those incomprehensible French words the
peasant had uttered, and a chill of horror ran down his spine.
  "What nonsense!" thought Vronsky, and glanced at his watch.
  It was half-past eight already. He rang up his servant, dressed in
haste, and went out on the steps, completely forgetting the dream
and only worried at being late. As he drove up to the Karenins'
entrance he looked at his watch and saw it was ten minutes to nine.
A high, narrow carriage with a pair of grays was standing at the
entrance. He recognized Anna's carriage. "She is coming to me,"
thought Vronsky, "and better she should. I don't like going into
that house. But no matter; I can't hide myself," he thought, and
with that manner peculiar to him from childhood, as of a man who has
nothing to be ashamed of, Vronsky got out of his sleigh and went to
the door. The door opened, and the hall porter with a rug on his arm
called the carriage. Vronsky, though he did not usually notice
details, noticed at this moment the amazed expression with which the
porter glanced at him. In the very doorway Vronsky almost ran up
against Alexei Alexandrovich. The gas jet threw its full light on
the bloodless, sunken face under the black hat, and on the white
cravat, brilliant against the beaver of the coat. Karenin's fixed,
dull eyes were fastened upon Vronsky's face. Vronsky bowed, and Alexei
Alexandrovich, chewing his lips, lifted his hand to his hat and went
on. Vronsky saw him get into the carriage without looking back,
receive the rug and the opera glasses through the window, and
disappear. Vronsky went into the hall. His brows were scowling, and
his eyes gleamed with a proud and angry light in them.
  "What a situation!" he thought. "If he would fight, would stand up
for his honor, I could act, could express my feelings; but this
weakness or baseness... He puts me in the position of playing false,
which I never meant and never mean to do."
  Vronsky's ideas had changed since the day of his conversation with
Anna in the Vrede garden. Unconsciously yielding to the weakness of
Anna- who had surrendered herself up to him utterly, and simply looked
to him to decide her fate, ready to submit to anything- he had long
ceased to think that their liaison might end as he had thought then.
His ambitious plans had retreated into the background again, and
feeling that he had got out of that circle of activity in which
everything was definite, he had given himself up entirely to his
passion, and that passion was binding him more and more closely to
her.
  He was still in the hall when he caught the sound of her
retreating footsteps. He realized she had been expecting him, had
listened for him, and was now going back to the drawing room.
  "No," she cried, on seeing him, and at the first sound of her
voice the tears came into her eyes. "No; if things are to go on like
this, the end will come much, much too soon."
  "What is it, dear one?"
  "What? I've been waiting in agony for an hour, two hours... No, I
won't... I can't quarrel with you. Of course you couldn't come. No,
I won't."
  She laid her two hands on his shoulders, and looked a long while
at him with a profound, passionate, and, at the same time, searching
look. She was studying his face to make up for the time she had not
seen him. She was, every time she saw him, making the picture of him
in her imagination (incomparably superior, impossible in reality)
fit with him as he really was.
                             III.

  "You met him?" she asked, when they had sat down at the table in the
lamplight. "You're punished, you see, for being late."
  "Yes; but how was it? Wasn't he to be at the Council?"
  "He had been and come back, and was going out somewhere again. But
that doesn't matter. Don't talk about it. Where have you been? With
the Prince still?"
  She knew every detail of his existence. He was going to say that
he had been up all night and had dropped asleep, but looking at her
thrilled and rapturous face, he was ashamed. And he said he had had to
report on the Prince's departure.
  "But it's over now? He is gone?"
  "Thank God it's over! You wouldn't believe how insufferable it's
been for me."
  "Why so? Isn't it the life all of you- all young men- always
lead?" she said, knitting her brows; and, taking up the crochet work
that was lying on the table, she began drawing the hook out of it,
without looking at Vronsky.
  "I gave that life up long ago," said he, wondering at the change
in her face, and trying to divine its meaning. "And I confess," he
said, with a smile, showing his thick, white teeth, "this week I've
been, as it were, looking at myself in a glass, seeing that life,
and I didn't like it."
  She held the work in her hands, but did not crochet, and looked at
him with strange, shining, and hostile eyes.
  "This morning Liza came to see me- they're not afraid to call on me,
in spite of the Countess Lidia Ivanovna," she put in- "and she told me
about your Athenian evening. How loathsome!"
  "I was just going to say..."
  She interrupted him.
  "It was that Therese you used to know?"
  "I was just saying..."
  "How disgusting you are, you men! How is it you can't understand
that a woman can never forget that," she said, getting more and more
angry, and so letting him see the cause of her irritation, "especially
a woman who cannot know your life? What do I know? What have I ever
known?" she said. "Only what you tell me. And how do I know whether
you tell me the truth?..."
  "Anna, you hurt me. Don't you trust me? Haven't I told you that I
haven't a thought I wouldn't lay bare to you?"
  "Yes, yes," she said, evidently trying to suppress her jealous
thoughts. "But if only you knew how wretched I am! I believe you, I
believe you.... What were you saying?"
  But he could not at once recall what he had been going to say. These
fits of jealousy, which of late had been more and more frequent with
her, horrified him, and however much he tried to disguise the fact,
made him feel cold to her, although he knew the cause of her
jealousy was her love for him. How often he had told himself that
her love was happiness; and now she loved him as a woman can love when
love has outweighed for her all the good things of life- and he was
much further from happiness than when he had followed her from Moscow.
Then he had thought himself unhappy, but happiness was before him; now
he felt that the best happiness was already left behind. She was
utterly unlike what she had been when he first saw her. Both morally
and physically she had changed for the worse. She had broadened out
all over, and in her face at the time when she was speaking of the
actress there was an evil expression of hatred that distorted it. He
looked at her as a man looks at a faded flower he has gathered, with
difficulty recognizing in it the beauty for which he picked and ruined
it. And in spite of this he felt that then, when his love was
stronger, he could, if he had greatly wished it, have torn that love
out of his heart; but now when, as at this moment it seemed to him
he felt no love for her, he knew that his bond with her could not be
broken.
  "Well, well, what was it you were going to say about the Prince? I
have driven away the fiend, I have," she added. The fiend was the name
they had given her jealousy. "What did you begin to tell me about
the Prince? Why did you find it so tiresome?"
  "Oh, it was intolerable!" he said, trying to pick up the thread of
his interrupted thought. "He does not improve on closer
acquaintance. If you want him defined, here he is: a prime, well-fed
animal, such as takes medals at the cattle shows, and nothing more,"
he said, with a tone of vexation that interested her.
  "No; how so?" she replied. "He's seen a great deal, anyway; he's
cultured?"
  "It's an utterly different culture- their culture. He's
cultivated, one sees, simply to be able to despise culture, as they
despise everything but animal pleasures."
  "But don't you all care for these animal pleasures?" she said, and
again he noticed a dark look in her eyes that avoided him.
  "How is it you're defending him?" he said, smiling.
  "I'm not defending him, it's nothing to me; but I imagine, if you
had not cared for those pleasures yourself, you might have got out
of them. But it affords you satisfaction to gaze at Therese in the
attire of Eve..."
  "Again- again the devil," Vronsky said, taking the hand she had laid
on the table and kissing it.
  "Yes; but I can't help it. You don't know what I have suffered
waiting for you. I believe I'm not jealous. I'm not jealous: I believe
you when you're here, near me; but when you're away somewhere
leading your life alone, so incomprehensible to me..."
   She turned away from him, pulled the hook at last out of the
crochet work, and rapidly with the help of her forefinger, began
working loop after loop of the wool that was dazzlingly white in the
lamplight, while the slender wrist moved swiftly, nervously in its
embroidered cuff.
  "How was it, then? Where did you meet Alexei Alexandrovich?" Her
voice sounded in an unnatural and jarring tone.
  "We ran against each other in the doorway."
  "And he bowed to you like this?"
  She drew a long face, and half-closing her eyes, quickly transformed
her expression, folded her hands, and Vronsky suddenly saw in her
beautiful face the very expression with which Alexei Alexandrovich had
bowed to him. He smiled, while she laughed gaily, with that sweet,
deep laugh, which was one of her greatest charms.
  "I don't understand him in the least," said Vronsky. "If after
your avowal to him at your summer villa he had broken with you, if
he had challenged me... But this I can't understand. How can he put up
with such a position? He feels it, that's evident."
  "He?" she said sneeringly. "He's perfectly satisfied."
  "What are we all miserable for, when everything might be so well?"
  "Except for him. Don't I know him- the falsity in which he's utterly
steeped?... Could one, with any feeling, live as he is living with me?
He understands nothing, and feels nothing. Could a man of any
feeling live in the same house with his unfaithful wife? Could he talk
to her, call her 'my dear'?"
  And again she could not help mimicking him: "Anna, ma chere; Anna,
dear!"
  "He's not a man, not a human being- he's a mannikin! No one knows
him; but I know him. Oh, if I'd been in his place, I'd long ago have
killed, have torn to pieces a wife like me. I wouldn't have said,
'Anna, ma chere'! He's not a man, he's a ministerial machine. He
doesn't understand that I'm your wife, that he's outside, that he's
superfluous.... Don't let's talk of him!..."
  "You're unfair, very unfair, dearest," said Vronsky, trying to
soothe her. "But never mind, don't let's talk of him. Tell me what
you've been doing. What is the matter? Why are you unwell, and what
did the doctor say?"
  She looked at him with mocking amusement. Evidently she had hit on
other absurd and grotesque aspects in her husband and was awaiting the
moment to give expression to them.
  But he went on:
  "I imagine that it's not illness, but your condition. When will it
be?"
  The ironical light died away in her eyes, but a different smile, a
consciousness of something, he did not know what, and of quiet
melancholy, came over her face.
  "Soon, soon. You say that our position is miserable, that we must
put an end to it. If you knew how terrible it is to me- what I would
give to be able to love you freely and unafraid! I should not
torture myself and torture you with my jealousy.... And it will come
soon, but not as we expect."
  And at the thought of how it would come, she seemed so pitiable to
herself that tears came into her eyes, and she could not go on. She
laid on his sleeve her hand, shining with its whiteness and its
rings in the lamplight.
  "It won't come as we suppose. I didn't mean to say this to you,
but you've made me. Soon, soon, all will be over, and we shall all,
all be at peace, and suffer no more."
  "I don't understand," he said, understanding her.
  "You asked when? Soon. And I shan't live through it. Don't interrupt
me!" and she made haste to speak. "I know it; I know for certain. I
shall die; and I'm very glad I shall die, and release myself and you."
  Tears dropped from her eyes; he bent down over her hand and began
kissing it, trying to hide his emotion, which, he knew, had no sort of
grounds, though he could not control it.
  "Yes, it's better so," she said, tightly gripping his hand.
"That's the only way- the only way left us."
  He had recovered himself, and lifted his head.
  "How absurd! What absurd nonsense you are talking!"
  "No, it's the truth."
  "What- what's the truth?"
  "That I shall die. I have had a dream."
  "A dream?" repeated Vronsky, and instantly he recalled the peasant
of his dream.
  "Yes, a dream," she said. "It's a long while since I dreamed it. I
dreamed that I ran into my bedroom, that I had to get something there,
to find out something; you know how it is in dreams," she said, her
eyes wide with horror; "and in the bedroom, in the corner, stood
something."
  "Oh, what nonsense! How can you believe..."
  But she would not let him interrupt her. What she was saying was too
important to her.
  "And the something turned round, and I saw it was a peasant with a
disheveled beard- a little man, and dreadful. I wanted to run away,
but he bent down over a sack, and was fumbling there with his
hands..."
  She showed how he had moved his hands. There was terror in her face.
And Vronsky, remembering his dream, felt the same terror filling his
soul.
  "He was fumbling and kept talking quickly, quickly in French, and,
you know, he burred: Il faut le battre, le fer, le broyer, le
petrir.... And in my horror I tried to wake up, and woke up... but
woke up in the dream. And I began asking myself what it meant. And
Kornei said to me: 'In childbirth you'll die, ma'am, you'll die....'
And I woke up."
  "What nonsense, what nonsense!" said Vronsky; but he felt himself
that there was no conviction in his voice.
  "But don't let's talk of it. Ring the bell, I'll have tea. And
stay a little, now; it's not long I shall..."
  But all at once she stopped. The expression of her face
instantaneously changed. Horror and excitement were suddenly
replaced by a look of soft, solemn, blissful attention. He could not
comprehend the meaning of the change. She was listening to the
stirring of the new life within her.
                             IV.

  Alexei Alexandrovich, after meeting Vronsky on his own steps, drove,
as he had intended, to the Italian opera. He sat through two acts
there, and saw everyone he wanted to see. On returning home, he
carefully scrutinized the hatstand, and noticing that there was not
a military overcoat there, he went, as usual, to his own room. But,
contrary to his usual habit, he did not go to bed; he walked up and
down his study till three o'clock in the morning. The feeling of
furious anger with his wife, who would not observe the proprieties and
keep to the one stipulation he had laid on her- not to receive her
lover in her own house- gave him no peace. She had not complied with
his request, and he was bound to punish her and carry out his
threat- obtain a divorce and take away his son. He knew all the
difficulties connected with this course, but he had said he would do
it, and now he must carry out his threat. Countess Lidia Ivanovna
had hinted that this was the best way out of his position, and of late
the obtaining of divorces had been brought to such a pitch of
perfection that Alexei Alexandrovich saw a possibility of overcoming
the formal difficulties. Misfortunes never come singly, and the
affairs of the reorganization of the native tribes, and of the
irrigation of the lands of the Zaraisky province, had brought such
official worries upon Alexei Alexandrovich that he had been of late in
a continual state of extreme irritability.
  He did not sleep the whole night, and his fury growing in a sort
of vast, arithmetical progression, reached its highest limits in the
morning. He dressed in haste, and, as though carrying his cup full
of wrath, and fearing to spill any over, fearing to lose with his
wrath the energy necessary for the interview with his wife, he went
into her room directly he heard she was up.
  Anna, who had thought she knew her husband so well, was amazed at
his appearance when he went in to her. His brow was lowering and his
eyes stared darkly before him, avoiding her eyes; his mouth was
tightly and contemptuously shut. In his walk, in his gestures, in
the sound of his voice there was a determination and firmness such
as his wife had never seen in him. He went into her room, and, without
greeting her, walked straight up to her writing table, and, taking her
keys, opened a drawer.
  "What do you want?" she cried.
  "Your lover's letters," he said.
  "They're not here," she said, shutting the drawer; but from that
action he saw he had guessed right, and roughly pushing away her hand,
he quickly snatched a portfolio in which he knew she used to put her
most important papers. She tried to pull the portfolio away, but he
pushed her back.
  "Sit down! I have to speak to you," he said, putting the portfolio
under his arm, and squeezing it so tightly with his elbow that his
shoulder stood up.
  Amazed and intimidated, she gazed at him in silence.
  "I told you that I would not allow you to receive your lover in this
house."
  "I had to see him to..."
  She stopped, not finding a reason.
  "I do not enter into the details of why a woman wants to see her
lover."
  "I meant, I only..." she said, flushing hotly. This coarseness of
his angered her, and gave her courage. "Surely you must feel how
easy it is for you to insult me?" she said.
  "An honest man and an honest woman may be insulted, but to tell a
thief he's a thief is simply la constatation d'un fait."
  "This cruelty is something new- I did not know in you."
  "You call it cruelty for a husband to give his wife liberty,
giving her the honorable protection of his name, simply on the
condition of observing the proprieties: is that cruelty?"
  "It's worse that cruel- it's base, if you want to know!" Anna cried,
in a rush of hatred, and, getting up, she was about to leave the room.
  "No!" he shrieked in his shrill voice, which pitched a note even
higher than usual, and his big hands clutching her by the arm so
violently that red marks were left from the bracelet he was squeezing,
he forcibly made her sit down in her place. "Base! If you care to
use that word, what is base is to forsake husband and child for a
lover, while you eat your husband's bread!"
  She bowed her head. She did not say what she had said the evening
before to her lover, that he was her husband, and her husband was
superfluous; she did not even think of that. She felt all the
justice of his words, and only said softly:
  "You cannot describe my position as worse than I feel it to be
myself; but what are you saying all this for?"
  "What am I saying it for? What for?" he went on, as angrily. "So
that you may know that, since you have not carried out my wishes in
regard to observing outward decorum, I will take measures to put an
end to this state of things."
  "Soon, very soon, it will end, anyway," she said; and again, at
the thought of death near at hand and now desired, tears came into her
eyes.
  "It will end sooner than you and your lover have planned! If you
must have the satisfaction of animal passion..."
  "Alexei Alexandrovich! I won't say it's not generous, but it's not
like a gentleman to strike anyone who's down."
  "Yes, you only think of yourself! But the sufferings of a man who
was your husband have no interest for you. You don't care that his
whole life is ruined, that he is seff... seff..."
  Alexei Alexandrovich was speaking so quickly that he began to
stammer, and was utterly unable to articulate the word "suffering". In
the end he pronounced it "saffering". She wanted to laugh, and was
immediately ashamed that anything could amuse her at such a moment.
And for the first time, for an instant, she felt for him, put
herself in his place, and was sorry for him. But what could she say or
do? Her head sank, and she sat silent. He too was silent for some
time, and then began speaking in a frigid, less shrill voice,
emphasizing random words that had no special significance.
  I came to tell you..." he said.
  She glanced at him. "No; it was my fancy," she thought, recalling
the expression of his face when he stumbled over the word "suffering."
"No; can a man with those dull eyes, with that self-satisfied
complacency, feel anything?"
  "I cannot change anything," she whispered.
  "I have come to tell you that I am going tomorrow to Moscow, and
shall not return again to this house, and you will receive notice of
what I decide through the lawyer into whose hands I shall entrust
the task of getting a divorce. My son is going to my sister's," said
Alexei Alexandrovich, with an effort recalling what he had meant to
say about his son.
  "You take Seriozha to hurt me," she said, looking at him from
under her brows. "You do not love him.... Leave me Seriozha!"
  "Yes, I have lost even my affection for my son, because he is
associated with the repulsion I feel for you. But still I shall take
him. Good-by!"
  And he was going away, but now she detained him.
  "Alexei Alexandrovich, leave me Seriozha!" she whispered once
more. "I have nothing else to say. Leave Seriozha till my... I shall
soon be confined; leave him!"
  Alexei Alexandrovich flared up, and, snatching his hand from her, he
went out of the room without a word.
                             V.

  The waiting room of the celebrated Peterburg lawyer was full when
Alexei Alexandrovich entered it. Three ladies- an old lady, a young
lady, and a merchant's wife, and three gentlemen- one a German
banker with a ring on his finger, the second a merchant with a
beard, and the third a wrathful-looking government clerk in official
uniform, with a cross on his neck- had obviously been waiting a long
while already. Two clerks were writing at tables with scratching pens.
The appurtenances of the writing tables, about which Alexei
Alexandrovich was himself very fastidious, were exceptionally good. He
could not help observing this. One of the clerks, without getting
up, turned fretfully to Alexei Alexandrovich, half-closing his eyes.
  "What is it you wish?"
  "My business has to do with the lawyer."
  "He is engaged," the clerk responded severely, and he pointed with
his pen at the persons waiting, and went on writing.
  "Can't he spare time to see me?" said Alexei Alexandrovich.
  "He has no time free; he is always busy. Kindly wait your turn."
  "Then I must trouble you to give him my card," Alexei
Alexandrovich said with dignity, seeing the impossibility of
preserving his incognito.
  The clerk took the card and, obviously not approving of what he read
on it, went to the door.
  Alexei Alexandrovich was in principle in favor of the publicity of
legal proceedings, though for some higher official considerations he
disliked the application of the principle in Russia, and disapproved
of it, as far as he could disapprove of anything instituted by
authority of the Emperor. His whole life had been spent in
administrative work, and consequently, when he did not approve of
anything, his disapproval was softened by the recognition of the
inevitability of mistakes and the possibility of reform in every
department. In the new public law courts he disliked the
restrictions laid on the lawyers conducting cases. But till then he
had had nothing to do with the law courts, and so had disapproved of
their publicity simply in theory; now his disapprobation was
strengthened by the unpleasant impression made on him in the
lawyer's waiting room.
  "He will be out right away," said the clerk; and two minutes later
there did actually appear in the doorway the large figure of an old
student of jurisprudence who had been consulting with the lawyer,
and the lawyer himself.
  The lawyer was a little, squat, bald man, with a dark, reddish
beard, light-colored long eyebrows, and beetling brow. He was
attired as though for a wedding, from his cravat to his double watch
chain and patent-leather shoes. His face was clever and rustic, but
his dress was dandified and in bad taste.
  "Pray walk in," said the lawyer, addressing Alexei Alexandrovich;
and, gloomily ushering Karenin in before him, he closed the door.
"Won't you sit down?" He indicated an armchair at a writing table
covered with papers. He sat down himself, and, rubbing his little
hands with short fingers covered with white hairs, he bent his head on
one side. But as soon as he was settled in this position a moth flew
over the table. The lawyer, with a swiftness that could never have
been expected of him, opened his hands, caught the moth, and resumed
his former attitude.
  "Before beginning to speak of my business," said Alexei
Alexandrovich, following the lawyer's movements with wondering eyes,
"I ought to observe that the matter about which I have to speak to you
is to be a secret."
  The lawyer's drooping reddish mustaches were stirred by a scarcely
perceptible smile.
  "I should not be a lawyer if I could not keep the secrets confided
to me. But if you would like proof..."
  Alexei Alexandrovich glanced at his face, and saw that the shrewd,
gray eyes were laughing, and seemed to know all about it already.
  "You know my name?" Alexei Alexandrovich resumed.
  "I know you and the good"- again he caught a moth- "work you are
doing, like every Russian," said the lawyer, bowing.
  Alexei Alexandrovich sighed, plucking up his courage. But, having
once made up his mind, he went on in his shrill voice, without
timidity or hesitation, accentuating a word here and there.
  "I have the misfortune," Alexei Alexandrovich began, "to be a
deceived husband, and I desire to break off all relations with my wife
by legal means- that is, to be divorced; but do this so that my son
may not remain with his mother."
  The lawyer's gray eyes tried not to laugh, but they were dancing
with irrepressible glee, and Alexei Alexandrovich saw that it was
not simply the delight of a man who has just got a profitable job:
there was triumph and joy, there was a gleam like the malignant
gleam he had seen in his wife's eyes.
  "You desire my assistance in securing a divorce?"
  "Yes, precisely; but I ought to warn you that I may be wasting
your time and attention. I have come simply to consult you as a
preliminary step. I want a divorce, but the form which it may take
is of great consequence to me. It is very possible that if that form
does not correspond with my requirements I may give up a legal
action."
  "Oh, that's always the case," said the lawyer, "and that's always
for you to decide."
  He let his eyes rest on Alexei Alexandrovich's feet, feeling that he
might offend his client by the sight of his irrepressible amusement.
He looked at a moth that flew before his nose, and moved his hand, but
did not catch it from regard for Alexei Alexandrovich's situation.
  "Though in their general features our laws on this subject are known
to me," pursued Alexei Alexandrovich, "I should be glad to have an
idea of the forms in which such things are done, in practice."
  "You would be glad," the lawyer, without lifting his eyes,
responded, adopting, with a certain satisfaction, the tone of his
client's remarks, "for me to lay before you all the methods by which
you could secure what you desire?"
  And on receiving an assenting nod from Alexei Alexandrovich, he went
on, stealing a glance now and then at Alexei Alexandrovich's face,
which was growing red in patches.
  "Divorce by our laws," he said, with a slight shade of
disapprobation of our laws, "is possible, as you are aware, in the
following cases... To wait!" he called to a clerk who put his head
in at the door, but he got up all the same, said a few words to him,
and sat down again. "In the following cases: physical defect in the
married parties, desertion without communication for five years," he
said, crooking a short finger covered with hair, "adultery" (this word
he pronounced with obvious satisfaction), "subdivided as follows"
(he continued to crook his fat fingers, though the cases and their
subdivisions could obviously not be classified together): "physical
defect of the husband or of the wife, adultery of the husband or of
the wife." As by now all his fingers were used up, he straightened
them and went on: "This is the theoretical view; but I imagine you
have done me the honor to apply to me in order to learn its
application in practice. And therefore, guided by precedents, I must
inform you that in practice cases of divorce may all be reduced to the
following- there's no physical defect, I may assume, nor
desertion?..."
  Alexei Alexandrovich bowed his head in assent.
  "They may be reduced to the following: adultery of one of the
married parties, and the detection in the fact of the guilty party
by mutual agreement, and, failing such agreement, accidental
detection. It must be admitted that the latter case is rarely met with
in practice," said the lawyer, and stealing a glance at Alexei
Alexandrovich he paused, as a man selling pistols, after enlarging
on the advantages of each weapon, might await his customer's choice.
But Alexei Alexandrovich said nothing, and therefore the lawyer went
on: "The most usual and simple, the sensible course, I consider, is
adultery by mutual consent. I should not permit myself to express it
so, speaking with a man of no education," he said, "but I imagine that
to you this is comprehensible."
  Alexei Alexandrovich was, however, so perturbed that he did not
immediately comprehend all the reasonableness of adultery by mutual
consent, and his eyes expressed this uncertainty; but the lawyer
promptly came to his assistance.
  "People cannot go on living together- here you have a fact. And if
both are agreed about it, the details and formalities become a
matter of no importance. And at the same time this is the simplest and
most certain method."
  Alexei Alexandrovich understood fully now. But he had religious
scruples, which hindered the execution of such a plan.
  "That is out of the question in the present case," he said. "Only
one alternative is possible: involuntary detection, supported by
letters which I have."
  At the mention of letters the lawyer pursed up his lips, and gave
utterance to a thin little compassionate and contemptuous sound.
  "Kindly consider," he began, "cases of that kind are, as you are
aware, under ecclesiastical jurisdiction; the reverend fathers are
fond of going into the minutest details in cases of that kind," he
said, with a smile which betrayed his sympathy with the taste of the
reverend fathers. "Letters may, of course, be a partial
confirmation; but detection in the act there must be of the most
direct kind- that is, by eyewitnesses. In fact, if you do me the honor
to trust me with your confidence, you will do well to leave me the
choice of the measures to be employed. If one wants the result, one
must allow the means."
  "If it is so..." Alexei Alexandrovich began, suddenly turning white;
but at that moment the lawyer rose and again went to the door to speak
to the intruding clerk.
  "Tell her we don't haggle over fees!" he said, and returned to
Alexei Alexandrovich.
  On his way back he caught, unobserved, another moth. "Nice state
my rep curtains will be in by the summer!" he thought, frowning.
  "And so you were saying?..." he said.
  "I will communicate my decision to you by letter," said Alexei
Alexandrovich, getting up, and he clutched at the table. After
standing a moment in silence, he said: "From your words I may
consequently conclude that a divorce may be obtained? I would ask
you to let me know what your terms are."
  "It may be obtained if you give me complete liberty of action," said
the lawyer, without answering his question. "When can I count on
receiving word from you?" he asked moving toward the door, his eyes
and his patent-leather shoes shining.
  "In a week's time. You will be kind enough to communicate to me your
answer as to whether you will undertake to conduct the case, and on
what terms."
  "Very good, sir."
  The lawyer bowed respectfully, let his client out of the door,
and, left alone, gave himself up to his sense of amusement. He felt so
mirthful that, contrary to his rule, he made a reduction in his
terms to the haggling lady, and gave up catching moths, finally
deciding that next winter he must have the furniture covered with
velvet, like Sigonin's.
                             VI.

  Alexei Alexandrovich had gained a brilliant victory at the sitting
of the Commission of the 17th of August, but in the sequel this
victory cut the ground from under his feet. The new commission for the
inquiry into the condition of the native tribes on every aspect had
been formed and despatched to its destination with an unusual speed
and energy, inspired by Alexei Alexandrovich. Within three months a
report was presented. The condition of the native tribes was
investigated in its political, administrative, economic, ethnographic,
material, and religious aspects. To all these questions there were
answers admirably stated, and answers admitting no shade of doubt,
since they were not a product of human thought, always liable to
error, but were all the product of official activity. The answers were
all based on official data furnished by governors and bishops, and
founded on the reports of district magistrates and ecclesiastical
superintendents, founded in their turn on the reports of local
authorities and parish priests; and so all of these answers were
unhesitating and certain. All such questions as, for instance, the
cause of crop failures, why certain tribes adhered to their ancient
beliefs, and so on- questions which, but for the convenient
intervention of the official machine, are not, and cannot be solved
for ages- received full, unhesitating solution. And this solution
was in favor of Alexei Alexandrovich's contention. But Stremov, who
had felt stung to the quick at the last sitting, had, on the reception
of the commission's report, resorted to tactics which Alexei
Alexandrovich had not anticipated. Stremov, carrying with him
several other members, went over to Alexei Alexandrovich's side,
and, not contenting himself with warmly defending the measure proposed
by Karenin, proposed other measures, still more extreme, in the same
direction. These measures, still stronger than Alexei
Alexandrovich's fundamental idea, were passed by the commission, and
then the aim of Stremov's tactics became apparent. Carried to an
extreme, the measures seemed at once to be so absurd that the
highest authorities, and public opinion, and intellectual ladies,
and the newspapers, all at the same time fell foul of them, expressing
their indignation both with the measures and their nominal father,
Alexei Alexandrovich. Stremov drew back, affecting to have blindly
followed Karenin, and to be astounded and distressed at what had
been done. This meant the defeat of Alexei Alexandrovich. But in spite
of failing health, in spite of his domestic griefs, he did not give
in. There was a split in the Commission. Some members, with Stremov at
their head, justified their mistake on the ground that they had put
faith in the commission of revision, instituted by Alexei
Alexandrovich, and maintained that the report of the commission was
rubbish, and simply so much wastepaper. Alexei Alexandrovich, with a
following of those who saw the danger of so revolutionary an
attitude to official documents, persisted in upholding the
statements obtained by the revising commission. In consequence of
this, in the higher spheres, and even in society, all was chaos, and
although everyone was interested, no one could tell whether the native
tribes really were becoming impoverished and ruined, or whether they
were in a flourishing condition. The position of Alexei Alexandrovich,
owing to this, and partly owing to the contempt lavished on him for
his wife's infidelity, became very precarious. And in this position he
took an important resolution. To the astonishment of the Commission,
he announced that he should ask permission to go himself to
investigate the question on the spot. And having obtained
permission, Alexei Alexandrovich prepared to set off to these remote
provinces.
  Alexei Alexandrovich's departure created a great stir, the more so
as just before he started he officially returned the posting fares
allowed him for twelve horses to drive to his destination.
  "I think it very noble," Betsy said about this to the Princess
Miaghkaia. "Why take money for posting horses when everyone knows that
there are railways everywhere now?"
  But Princess Miaghkaia did not agree, and the Princess Tverskaia's
opinion annoyed her indeed.
  "It's all very well for you to talk," said she, "when you have I
don't know how many millions; but I am very glad when my husband
goes on a revising tour in the summer. It's very good for him and
pleasant traveling about, and it's a settled arrangement for me to
keep a carriage and hired coach on the money."
  On his way to the remote provinces Alexei Alexandrovich stopped
for three days at Moscow.
  The day after his arrival he went to call on the governor general.
At the crossroads by Gazetny Lane, where there are always crowds of
carriages and hired sleighs, Alexei Alexandrovich suddenly heard his
name called out in such a loud and cheerful voice that he could not
help looking round. At the corner of the pavement, in a short, stylish
overcoat and a low-crowned fashionable hat, jauntily askew, with a
smile that showed a gleam of white teeth and red lips, stood Stepan
Arkadyevich, radiant, young, and beaming. He called him vigorously and
urgently, and insisted on his stopping. He had one arm on the window
of a carriage that was stopping at the corner, and out of the window
were thrust the heads of a lady in a velvet hat, and two children.
Stepan Arkadyevich was smiling and beckoning to his brother-in-law.
The lady smiled a kindly smile too, and she too waved her hand to
Alexei Alexandrovich. It was Dolly with her children.
  Alexei Alexandrovich did not want to see anyone in Moscow, and least
of all his wife's brother. He raised his hat and would have driven on,
but Stepan Arkadyevich told his coachman to stop, and ran across the
snow to him.
  "Well, what a shame not to have let us know! Been here long? I was
at Dussot's yesterday and saw 'Karenin' on the visitors' list, but
it never entered my head that it was you," said Stepan Arkadyevich,
sticking his head in at the window of the carriage, "or I should
have looked you up. I am glad to see you!" he said, knocking one
foot against the other to shake the snow off. "What a shame you did
not let us know!" he repeated.
  "I had no time; I am very busy," Alexei Alexandrovich responded
dryly.
  "Come to my wife- she does so want to see you."
  Alexei Alexandrovich unfolded the rug in which his frozen feet
were wrapped, and getting out of his carriage made his way over the
snow to Darya Alexandrovna.
  "Why, Alexei Alexandrovich, what are you cutting us like this
for?" said Dolly smiling.
  "I was very busy. Delighted to see you!" he said in a tone clearly
indicating that he was annoyed by it. "How are you?"
  "Tell me, how is my darling Anna?"
  Alexei Alexandrovich mumbled something and would have gone on. But
Stepan Arkadyevich stopped him.
  "I tell you what we'll do tomorrow. Dolly, ask him to dinner.
We'll ask Koznishev and Pestsov, so as to entertain him with our
Moscow intellectuals."
  "Yes, please, do come," said Dolly; "we will expect you at five-
or six o'clock, if you like. How is my darling Anna? How long..."
  "She is quite well," Alexei Alexandrovich mumbled, frowning.
"Delighted!" and he moved away toward his carriage.
  "You will come?" Dolly called after him.
  Alexei Alexandrovich said something which Dolly could not catch in
the noise of the moving carriages.
  "I shall come round tomorrow!" Stepan Arkadyevich shouted to him.
  Alexei Alexandrovich got into his carriage, and buried himself in it
so as neither to see nor to be seen.
  "Queer fish!" said Stepan Arkadyevich to his wife, and, glancing
at his watch, he made a motion of his hand before his face, indicating
a caress to his wife and children, and walked jauntily along the
pavement.
  "Stiva! Stiva!" Dolly called, reddening.
  He turned round.
  "I must get coats, you know, for Grisha and Tania. Give me the
money."
  "Never mind; you tell them I'll pay the bill!" and he vanished,
nodding genially to an acquaintance who drove by.
                             VII.

  The next day was Sunday. Stepan Arkadyevich went to the Grand
Theater to a rehearsal of the ballet, and gave Masha Chibisova, a
pretty dancing girl who had been engaged through his protection, the
coral necklace he had promised her the evening before, and, behind the
scenes, in the dim daylight of the theater, managed to kiss her pretty
little face, radiant over the present. Besides the gift of the
necklace he wanted to arrange a meeting with her after the ballet.
After explaining that he could not come at the beginning of the
ballet, he promised he would come for the last act and take her to
supper. From the theater Stepan Arkadyevich drove to Okhotny Riad,
selected himself the fish and asparagus for dinner, and by twelve
o'clock was at Dussot's, where he had to see three people, luckily all
staying at the same hotel: Levin, who had recently come back from
abroad and was staying there; the new head of his board who had just
been promoted to that position, and had come on a tour of revision
to Moscow; and his brother-in-law, Karenin, whom he must see, so as to
be sure of bringing him to dinner.
  Stepan Arkadyevich liked dining, but still better he liked to give a
dinner, small, but very choice, both as regards the food and drink and
as regards the selection of guests. He particularly liked the
program of that day's dinner. There would be fresh perch, asparagus,
and la piece de resistance- first-rate, but quite plain, roast beef,
and wines to suit: so much for the eating and drinking. Kitty and
Levin would be of the party, and, so that this might not be
obtrusively evident, there would be a girl cousin too, and young
Shcherbatsky, and- la piece de resistance among the guests- Sergei
Koznishev and Alexei Alexandrovich. Sergei Ivanovich was a Moscow man,
and a philosopher; Alexei Alexandrovich a Peterburg man, and a
practical politician. He was asking, too, the well-known eccentric
enthusiast, Pestsov, a liberal, a great talker, a musician, a
historian, and the most delightfully youthful person of fifty, who
would be a sauce or garnish for Koznishev and Karenin. He would
provoke them and set them off against one another.
  The second installment for the forest had been received from the
merchant and was not yet exhausted; Dolly had been very amiable and
good-humored of late, and the idea of the dinner pleased Stepan
Arkadyevich from every point of view. He was in the most
lighthearted mood. There were two circumstances a little unpleasant,
but these two circumstances were drowned in the sea of good-humored
gaiety which flooded the soul of Stepan Arkadyevich. These two
circumstances were: first, that on meeting Alexei Alexandrovich the
day before in the street Stiva had noticed that the latter was cold
and reserved with him, and putting together the expression of Alexei
Alexandrovich's face, and the fact that he had not come to see them,
or let them know of his arrival, with the rumors he had heard about
Anna and Vronsky, Stepan Arkadyevich guessed that something was
wrong between the husband and wife.
  That was one disagreeable thing. The other slightly disagreeable
fact was that the new head of his board, like all new heads, already
had the reputation of a terrible person, who got up at six o'clock
in the morning, worked like a horse, and insisted on his
subordinates working in the same way. Moreover, this new head had
the further reputation of being a bear in his manners, and was,
according to all reports, a man of a class in all respects the
opposite of that to which his predecessor had belonged, and to which
Stepan Arkadyevich had hitherto belonged himself. On the previous
day Stepan Arkadyevich had appeared at the office in a uniform, and
the new chief had been very affable and had talked to him as to an
acquaintance. Consequently Stepan Arkadyevich deemed it his duty to
call upon him in his nonofficial dress. The thought that the new chief
might not give him a warm reception was the other unpleasant thing.
But Stepan Arkadyevich instinctively felt that everything would come
round all right. "They're all human, all men, like us poor sinners;
why be nasty and quarrelsome?" he thought as he went into the hotel.
  "Good day, Vassilii," he said, walking into the corridor with his
hat cocked on one side, and addressing a footman he knew; "why, you've
let your whiskers grow! Levin- number seven, eh? Take me up, please.
And find out whether Count Anychkin" (this was the new head) "is
receiving."
  "Yes, sir," Vassilii responded, smiling. "You've not been to see
us for a long while."
  "I was here yesterday, but at the other entrance. Is this number
seven?"
  Levin was standing with a peasant from Tver in the middle of the
room, measuring a fresh bearskin, when Stepan Arkadyevich came in.
  "What! You killed him?" cried Stepan Arkadyevich. "Well done! A
she-bear? How are you, Arkhip!"
  He shook hands with the peasant and sat down on a chair, without
taking off his coat and hat.
  "Come, take off your coat and stay a little," said Levin, taking his
hat.
  "No, I haven't time; I've only looked in for just a second,"
answered Stepan Arkadyevich. He threw open his fur coat, but afterward
did take it off, and sat on for a whole hour, talking to Levin about
hunting and the most intimate subjects. "Come, tell me, please, what
you did abroad. Where have you been?" said Stepan Arkadyevich, when
the peasant had gone.
  "Oh, I stayed in Germany, in Prussia, in France, and in England- not
in the capitals, but in the manufacturing towns- and saw a great
deal that was new to me. And I'm glad I went."
  "Yes, I knew your idea of the solution of the labor question."
  "Not a bit: in Russia there can be no labor question. In Russia
the question is that of the relation of the working people to the
land; though the question exists there too- but there it's a matter of
repairing what's been ruined, while with us..."
  Stepan Arkadyevich listened attentively to Levin.
  "Yes, yes!" he said. "It's very possible you're right. But I'm
glad you're in good spirits, and are hunting bears, and working, and
interested. Shcherbatsky told me another story- he met you: that you
were in such a depressed state, talking of nothing but death..."
  "Well, what of it? I've not given up thinking of death," said Levin.
"It's true that it's high time I was dead; and that all this is
nonsense. It's the truth I'm telling you. I do value my idea and my
work awfully; but really, do consider this: all this world of ours
is nothing but a speck of mildew, which has grown up on a tiny planet.
And yet we think that something great is possible to us- ideas,
work! Grains of sand- that's all they are."
  "But all that's as old as the hills, my boy!"
  "It is old; but, do you know, when you grasp this fully, then
somehow everything becomes of no consequence. When you understand that
you will die tomorrow, if not today, and nothing will be left, then
everything is so unimportant! And I consider my idea very important,
but it turns out really to be just as unimportant, even if it were
carried out, as outwitting that she-bear. So one goes on living,
amusing oneself with hunting, with work- anything, so as not to
think of death!"
  Stepan Arkadyevich smiled a subtle and affectionate smile as he
listened to Levin.
  "Well, of course! Here you've come round to my point. Do you
remember you attacked me for seeking enjoyment in life?

           'Don't be, O moralist, severe...'"

  "No; all the same, what's fine in life is..." Levin hesitated.
"Oh! I don't know. All I know is that we shall soon be dead."
  "Why so soon?"
  "And I know there's less charm in life, when one thinks of death-
but there's more peace."
  "On the contrary, the finish is always the best. But I must be
going," said Stepan Arkadyevich, getting up for the tenth time.
  "Oh, no, stay a bit!" said Levin, detaining him. "Now, when shall we
see each other again? I'm going tomorrow."
  "I'm a fine fellow! Why, that's just what I came for! You simply
must come to dinner with us today. Your brother's coming, and Karenin,
my brother-in-law."
  "You don't mean to say he's here?" said Levin, and he wanted to
inquire about Kitty. He had heard at the beginning of the winter
that she was at Peterburg with her sister, the wife of the diplomat,
and he did not know whether she had come back or not; but he changed
his mind and did not ask. "Whether she's coming or not, I don't care,"
he said to himself.
  "So you'll come?"
  "Of course."
  "At five o'clock, then, and wear a frock coat."
  And Stepan Arkadyevich got up and went down below to the new head of
his department. Instinct had not misled Stepan Arkadyevich. The
terrible new head turned out to be an extremely amenable person, and
Stepan Arkadyevich lunched with him and stayed on, so that it was past
three o'clock before he got to Alexei Alexandrovich.
                             VIII.

  Alexei Alexandrovich, on coming back from church service, had
spent the whole morning indoors. He had two pieces of business
before him that morning; first, to receive and send on a deputation
from the native tribes which was on its way to Peterburg, and which
was now at Moscow; secondly, to write the promised letter to the
lawyer. The deputation, though it had been summoned at Alexei
Alexandrovich's instigation, was not without its discomforting and
even dangerous aspect, and he was glad he had found it in Moscow.
The members of this deputation had not the slightest conception of
their duty and the part they were to play. They naively believed
that it was their business to lay before the Commission their needs
and the actual condition of things, and to ask assistance of the
government, and utterly failed to grasp that some of their
statements and requests supported the contention of the enemy's
side, and so spoiled the whole business. Alexei Alexandrovich was
busily engaged with them for a long while, drew up a program for
them from which they were not to depart, and on dismissing them
wrote a letter to Peterburg for the guidance of the deputation. He had
his chief support in this affair in the Countess Lidia Ivanovna. She
was a specialist in the matter of deputations, and no one knew
better than she how to puff, and put them in the way they should go.
Having completed this task, Alexei Alexandrovich wrote the letter to
the lawyer. Without the slightest hesitation he gave him permission to
act as he might judge best. In the letter he enclosed three of
Vronsky's notes to Anna, which were in the portfolio he had taken
away.
  Since Alexei Alexandrovich had left home with the intention of not
returning to his family again, and since he had been at the lawyer's
and had spoken, though only to one man, of his intention, since,
moreover, he had translated the matter from the world of real life
to the world of ink and paper, he had grown more and more used to
his own intention, and by now distinctly perceived the feasibility
of its execution.
  He was sealing the envelope to the lawyer, when he heard the loud
tones of Stepan Arkadyevich's voice. Stepan Arkadyevich was
disputing with Alexei Alexandrovich's servant, and insisting on
being announced.
  "No matter," thought Alexei Alexandrovich, "so much the better. I
will inform him at once of my position in regard to his sister, and
explain why it is I can't dine with him."
  "Come in!" he said aloud, collecting his papers, and putting them
under the blotting pad.
  "There, you see, you're talking nonsense, and he is at home!"
responded Stepan Arkadyevich's voice, addressing the servant, who
had refused to let him in, and, taking off his coat as he went,
Oblonsky walked into the room. "Well, I'm awfully glad I've found you!
So I hope..." Stepan Arkadyevich began cheerfully.
  "I cannot come," Alexei Alexandrovich said coldly, standing and
not asking his visitor to sit down.
  Alexei Alexandrovich had thought to pass at once into those frigid
relations in which he ought to stand with the brother of a wife
against whom he was beginning a suit for divorce. But he had not taken
into account the ocean of kindliness brimming over in the heart of
Stepan Arkadyevich.
  Stepan Arkadyevich opened wide his clear, shining eyes.
  "Why can't you? What do you mean?" he asked in perplexity,
speaking in French. "Oh, but it's a promise. And we're all counting on
you."
  "I want to tell you that I can't dine at your house, because the
terms of relationship which have existed between us must cease."
  "How? How do you mean? For what reason?" said Stepan Arkadyevich
with a smile.
  "Because I am beginning an action for divorce against your sister,
my wife. I ought to have..."
  But, before Alexei Alexandrovich had time to finish his sentence,
Stepan Arkadyevich was behaving not at all as he had expected.
Stepan Arkadyevich groaned and sank into an armchair.
  "No, Alexei Alexandrovich! What are you saying?" cried Oblonsky, and
his suffering was apparent in his face.
  "It is so."
  "Excuse me, I can't, I can't believe it!"
  Alexei Alexandrovich sat down, feeling that his words had not had
the effect he anticipated, and that it would be unavoidable for him to
explain his position, and that, whatever explanations he might make,
his relations with his brother-in-law would remain unchanged.
  "Yes, I am brought to the painful necessity of seeking a divorce,"
he said.
  "I will say one thing, Alexei Alexandrovich. I know you for an
excellent, upright man; I know Anna- excuse me, I can't change my
opinion of her- for a good, an excellent woman; and so you must excuse
me if I cannot believe it. There is some misunderstanding," said he.
  "Oh, if it were merely a misunderstanding!..."
  "Pardon, I understand," interposed Stepan Arkadyevich. "But of
course... One thing: you must not act in haste. You must not, you must
not act in haste!"
  "I am not acting in haste," Alexei Alexandrovich said coldly, "but
one cannot ask advice of anyone in such a matter. I have quite made up
my mind."
  "This is awful!" said Stepan Arkadyevich. "I would do one thing,
Alexei Alexandrovich. I beseech you- do it!" he said. "No action has
yet been taken, if I understand rightly. Before you take advice, see
my wife, talk to her. She loves Anna like a sister, she loves you, and
she's a wonderful woman. For God's sake, talk to her! Do me that
favor, I beseech you!"
  Alexei Alexandrovich pondered, and Stepan Arkadyevich looked at
him sympathetically, without interrupting his silence.
  "You will go to see her?"
  "I don't know. That was just why I have not been to see you. I
imagine our relations must change."
  "Why so? I don't see that. Allow me to believe that, apart from
our connection, you have for me, at least in part, the same friendly
feeling I have always had for you... and sincere esteem," said
Stepan Arkadyevich, pressing his hand. "Even if your worst
suppositions were correct, I don't- and never would- take on myself to
judge either side, and I see no reason why our relations should be
affected. But now, do this, come and see my wife."
  "Well, we look at the matter differently," said Alexei Alexandrovich
coldly. "However, we won't discuss it."
  "No; why shouldn't you come today to dine, anyway? My wife's
expecting you. Please, do come. And, above all, talk it over with her.
She's a wonderful woman. For God's sake, on my knees, I implore you!"
  "If you so much wish it, I will come," said Alexei Alexandrovich,
sighing.
  And, anxious to change the conversation, he inquired about what
interested them both- the new head of Stepan Arkadyevich's board, a
man not yet old, who had suddenly been promoted to so high a position.

  Alexei Alexandrovich had previously felt no liking for Count
Anychkin, and had always differed from him in his opinions. But now,
from a feeling readily comprehensible to officials- that hatred felt
by one who has suffered a defeat in the service for one who has
received a promotion- he could not endure him.
  "Well, have you seen him?" said Alexei Alexandrovich with a
malignant smile.
  "Of course; he was at our sitting yesterday. He seems to know his
work capitally, and to be very energetic."
  "Yes, but what is his energy directed to?" said Alexei
Alexandrovich. "Is he aiming at doing anything, or simply doing
again what's been done? It's the great misfortune of our government-
this paper administration, of which he's a worthy representative."
  "Really, I don't know what fault one could find with him. His policy
I don't know, but one thing is certain- he's a very fine fellow,"
answered Stepan Arkadyevich. "I've just been seeing him, and he's
really a fine fellow. We lunched together, and I taught him how to
make- you know that drink- wine and oranges. It's so cooling. And it's
a wonder he didn't know it. He liked it awfully. No, really, he's a
fine fellow."
  Stepan Arkadyevich glanced at his watch.
  "Why, good heavens, it's four already, and I've still to go to
Dolgovushin's! So please come round to dinner. You can't imagine how
you will grieve my wife and me if you don't."
  The way in which Alexei Alexandrovich saw his brother-in-law out was
very different from the manner in which he had met him.
  "I've promised, and I'll come," he answered wearily.
  "Believe me, I appreciate it, and I hope you won't regret it,"
answered Stepan Arkadyevich, smiling.
  And, putting on his coat as he went, he patted the footman on the
head with his coat sleeve, chuckled, and went out.
  "At five o'clock, and wear your frock coat, please," he shouted once
more, returning at the door.
                             IX.

  It was past five, and several guests had already arrived, before the
host himself got home. He went in together with Sergei Ivanovich
Koznishev and with Pestsov, both of whom had reached the street door
at the same moment. These were the two leading representatives of
the Moscow intellectuals, as Oblonsky had called them. Both were men
respected for their character and their intelligence. They respected
each other, but were in complete and hopeless disagreement upon almost
every subject, not because they belonged to opposite parties, but
precisely because they were of the same party (their enemies refused
to see any distinction between their views); but, in that party,
each had his own special shade of opinion. And since no difference
is less easily overcome than the difference of opinion about
semiabstract questions, they never agreed on any opinion, and, indeed,
had long been accustomed to jeer without anger at each other's
incorrigible aberrations.
  They were just going in at the door, talking of the weather, when
Stepan Arkadyevich overtook them. In the drawing room there were
already sitting Prince Alexander Dmitrievich Shcherbatsky, young
Shcherbatsky, Turovtsin, Kitty, and Karenin.
  Stepan Arkadyevich saw immediately that things were not going well
in the drawing room without him. Darya Alexandrovna, in her best
gray silk gown, obviously worried about the children who were to
have their dinner by themselves in the nursery, and by her husband's
absence, was not equal to the task of making the party mix without
him. All were sitting like so many priests' daughters on a visit (so
the old Prince expressed it), obviously wondering why they were there,
and pumping up remarks simply to avoid being silent. Turovtsin-
goodhearted man- felt unmistakably like a fish out of water, and the
smile with which his thick lips greeted Stepan Arkadyevich said, as
plainly as words: "Well, old boy, you have popped me down in a learned
set! A drinking party, and the Chateau des Fleurs, would be more in my
line!" The old Prince sat in silence, his bright little eyes
watching Karenin with a sidelong look; and Stepan Arkadyevich saw that
he had already formed a sharp remark to sum up that politician of whom
guests had been invited to partake, as though he were a sturgeon.
Kitty was looking at the door, calling up all her energies to keep her
from blushing at the entrance of Konstantin Levin. Young Shcherbatsky,
who had not been introduced to Karenin, was trying to look as though
he were not in the least embarrassed by it. Karenin himself had
followed the Peterburg. etiquette for a dinner with ladies present and
was wearing evening dress and a white tie. Stepan Arkadyevich saw by
his face that he had come simply to keep his promise, and was
performing a disagreeable duty in being present at this gathering.
He was indeed the person chiefly responsible for the chill benumbing
all the guests before Stepan Arkadyevich came in.
  On entering the drawing room Stepan Arkadyevich apologized,
explaining that he had been detained by that Prince who was always the
scapegoat for all his absences and unpunctualities, and in one
moment he had made all the guests acquainted with each other, and,
bringing together Alexei Alexandrovich and Sergei Koznishev, had
started them on a discussion of the Russification of Poland, into
which they immediately plunged with Pestsov. Slapping Turovtsin on the
shoulder, he whispered something comic in his ear, and set him down by
his wife and the old Prince. Then he told Kitty she was looking very
pretty that evening, and presented Shcherbatsky to Karenin. In a
moment he had so kneaded together the social dough that the drawing
room became very lively, and there was a merry buzz of voices.
Konstantin Levin was the only person who had not arrived. But this was
so much the better, as, going into the dining room, Stepan Arkadyevich
found to his horror that the port and sherry had been procured from
Depre, and not from Leve, and, directing that the coachman should be
sent off as speedily as possible to Leve's he started back to the
drawing room.
  In the dining room he was met by Konstantin Levin.
  "I'm not late?"
  "You can never help being late!" said Stepan Arkadyevich, taking his
arm.
  "Have you a lot of people? Who's here?" asked Levin, unable to
help blushing, as he knocked the snow off his cap with his glove.
  "All our own set. Kitty's here. Come along, I'll introduce you to
Karenin."
  Stepan Arkadyevich, for all his liberal views, was well aware that
to meet Karenin was sure to be felt a flattering distinction, and so
treated his best friends to this honor. But at that instant Konstantin
Levin was not in a condition to feel all the gratification of making
such an acquaintance. He had not seen Kitty since that memorable
evening when he met Vronsky- not counting, that is, the moment when he
had had a glimpse of her on the highroad. He had known at the bottom
of his heart that he would see her here today. But, to keep his
thoughts free, he had tried to persuade himself that he did not know
it. Now when he heard that she was here, he was suddenly conscious
of such delight, and at the same time of such dread, that his breath
failed him and he could not utter what he wanted to say.
  "What is she like, what is she like? As she used to be, or as she
was in the carriage? What if Darya Alexandrovna told the truth? Why
shouldn't it be the truth?" he thought.
  "Oh, please, introduce me to Karenin," he brought out with an
effort, and with a desperately determined step he walked into the
drawing room and beheld her.
  She was not the same as she used to be, nor was she as she had
been in the carriage; she was quite different.
  She was scared, shy, shamefaced, and because of all this, still more
charming. She saw him the very instant he walked into the room. She
had been expecting him. She was delighted, and so confused at her
own delight that there was a moment, the moment when he went up to her
sister and glanced again at her, when she, and he, and Dolly, who
saw it all, thought she would break down and begin to cry. She
crimsoned, turned white, crimsoned again, and grew faint, waiting with
quivering lips for him to come to her. He went up to her, bowed, and
held out his hand without speaking. Except for the slight quiver of
her lips and the moisture in her eyes, making them brighter, her smile
was almost calm as she said:
  "How long it is since we've seen each other!" and, with desperate
determination, with her cold hand squeezed his.
  "You've not seen me, but I've seen you," said Levin, with a
radiant smile of happiness. "I saw you when you were driving from
the railway station to Ergushovo."
  "When?" she asked, wondering.
  "You were driving to Ergushovo," said Levin, feeling as if he
would sob with the rapture that was flooding his heart.- "And how
dared I associate a thought of anything not innocent with this
touching creature? And, yes, I do believe what Darya Alexandrovna told
me is true," he thought.
  Stepan Arkadyevich took him by the arm and led him away to Karenin.
  "Let me introduce you." He mentioned their names.
  "Very glad to meet you again," said Alexei Alexandrovich coldly,
shaking hands with Levin.
  "You are acquainted?" Stepan Arkadyevich asked in surprise.
  "We spent three hours together in the train," said Levin smiling,
"but got out, just as in a masquerade, quite mystified- at least I
was."
  "Oh, so that's it! Come along, please," said Stepan Arkadyevich,
pointing in the direction of the dining room.
  The men went into the dining room and went up to the table for
hors d'oeuvres, laid with six sorts of vodka and as many kinds of
cheese, some with little silver spades and some without, caviar,
herrings, preserves of various kinds, and plates with slices of French
bread.
  The men stood round the strong-smelling spirits and salt delicacies,
and the discussion of the Russification of Poland between Koznishev,
Karenin and Pestsov, died down in anticipation of dinner.
  Sergei Ivanovich was unequaled in his skill in winding up the most
heated and serious argument by some unexpected pinch of Attic salt
that changed the disposition of his opponent. He did this now.
  Alexei Alexandrovich had been maintaining that the Russification
of Poland could only be accomplished as a result of greater
principles, which ought to be introduced by the Russian government.
  Pestsov insisted that one country can absorb another only when it is
the more densely populated.
  Koznishev admitted both points, but with limitations. As they were
going out of the drawing room to conclude the argument, Koznishev said
smiling:
  "So, then, for the Russification of our foreign populations there is
but one method- to bring up as many children as one can. My brother
and I are terribly at fault, I see. You married men- especially you,
Stepan Arkadyevich- are the real patriots: what number have you
reached?" he said, smiling genially at their host and holding out a
tiny wineglass to him.
  Everyone laughed, and Stepan Arkadyevich with particular good humor.
  "Oh, yes, that's the best method!" he said, munching cheese and
filling the wineglass with a special sort of vodka. The conversation
dropped at the jest.
  "This cheese is not bad. Shall I give you some?" said the master
of the house. "Why, have you been going in for gymnastics again?" he
asked Levin, pinching his muscle with his left hand. Levin smiled,
bent his arm, and under Stepan Arkadyevich's fingers the muscles
swelled up like a sound cheese, hard as a knob of iron, through the
fine cloth of the coat.
  "What biceps! A perfect Samson!"
  "I imagine great strength is needed for hunting bears," observed
Alexei Alexandrovich, who had the mistiest notions about the chase. He
cut off and spread with cheese a wafer of bread fine as a spiderweb.
  Levin smiled.
  "Not at all. Quite the contrary- a child can kill a bear," he
said, with a slight bow moving aside for the ladies, who were
approaching the hors d'oeuvres table.
  "You have killed a bear, I've been told!" said Kitty, trying
assiduously to catch with her fork a perverse mushroom that would slip
away, and shaking the lace over her white arm. "Are there bears on
your place?" she added, turning her charming little head to him and
smiling.
  There was apparently nothing extraordinary in what she said, but
what unutterable meaning there was for him in every sound, in every
turn of her lips, her eyes, her hand as she said it! There was
entreaty for forgiveness, and trust in him, and tenderness- soft,
timid tenderness- and promise, and hope, and love for him, which he
could not but believe in, and which suffocated him with happiness.
  "No, we've been hunting in the Tver province. It was coming back
from there that I met your beau-frere in the train, or your
beau-frere's brother-in-law," he said with a smile. "It was an amusing
meeting."
  And he began telling with droll good humor how, after not sleeping
all night, he had, wearing a fur-lined, full-skirted coat, got into
Alexei Alexandrovich's compartment.
  "The conductor, forgetting the proverb, would have chucked me out on
account of my attire; but thereupon I began expressing my feelings
in elevated language, and... you, too," he said, addressing Karenin
and forgetting his name, "at first would have ejected me on the ground
of my coat, but afterward you took my part, for which I am extremely
grateful."
  "The rights of passengers generally to choose their seats are too
ill-defined," said Alexei Alexandrovich, rubbing the tips of his
fingers on his handkerchief.
  "I saw you were in uncertainty about me," said Levin, smiling
good-naturedly, "but I made haste to plunge into intellectual
conversation to smooth over the defects of my attire."
  Sergei Ivanovich, while he kept a conversation with their hostess,
had one ear for his brother, and he glanced askance at him. "What is
the matter with him today? Why such a conquering hero?" he thought. He
did not know that Levin was feeling as though he had grown wings.
Levin knew she was listening to his words and that she was glad to
listen to him. And this was the only thing that interested him. Not in
that room only, but in the whole world, there existed for him only
himself, with enormously increased importance and dignity in his own
eyes, and she. He felt himself on a pinnacle that made him giddy,
and far away down below were all those kind, excellent Karenins,
Oblonskys, and all the world.
  Quite without attracting notice, without glancing at them, as though
there were no other places left, Stepan Arkadyevich put Levin and
Kitty side by side.
  "Oh, you may as well sit there," he said to Levin.
  The dinner was as choice as the china, of which Stepan Arkadyevich
was a connoisseur. The soupe Marie-Louise was a splendid success;
the tiny patties eaten with it melted in the mouth and were
irreproachable. The two footmen and Matvei, in white cravats, did
their duty with the dishes and wines unobtrusively, quietly, and
dexterously. On the material side the dinner was a success; it was
no less so on the immaterial. The conversation, at times general and
at times between individuals, never paused, and toward the end the
company was so lively that the men rose from the table without
stopping speaking, and even Alexei Alexandrovich became lively.
                             X.

  Pestsov liked threshing an argument out to the end, and was not
satisfied with Sergei Ivanovich's words, especially as he felt the
injustice of his view.
  "I did not mean," he said over the soup, addressing Alexei
Alexandrovich, "mere density of population alone, but in conjunction
with fundamental ideas, and not by means of principles."
  "It seems to me," Alexei Alexandrovich said languidly, and with no
haste, "that that's the same thing. In my opinion, influence over
another people is only possible to the people which has the higher
development, which..."
  "But that's just the question," Pestsov broke in in his bass. He was
always in a hurry to speak, and seemed always to put his whole soul
into whatever he was saying; "of what are we to make higher
development consist? The English, the French, the Germans- which is at
the highest stage of development? Which of them will nationalize the
other? We see the Rhine provinces have been turned French, yet the
Germans are not at a lower stage!" he shouted. "There is another law
at work there!"
  "I fancy that the greater influence is always on the side of true
civilization," said Alexei Alexandrovich, slightly lifting his
eyebrows.
  "But what are we to lay down as the outward signs of true
civilization?" said Pestsov.
  "I imagine such signs are generally very well known," said Alexei
Alexandrovich.
  "But are they fully known?" Sergei Ivanovich put in with a subtle
smile. "It is the accepted view now that real culture must be purely
classical; but we see most intense disputes on each side of the
question, and there is no denying that the opposite camp has strong
points in its favor."
  "You are for the classics, Sergei Ivanovich. Will you take red
wine?" said Stepan Arkadyevich.
  "I am not expressing my own opinion of either form of culture,"
Sergei Ivanovich said, holding out his glass with a smile of
condescension, as to a child. "I only say that both sides have
strong arguments to support them," he went on, addressing Alexei
Alexandrovich. "My sympathies are classical from education, but in
this discussion I am personally unable to arrive at a conclusion. I
see no distinct grounds for classical studies being given a
pre-eminence over scientific studies."
  "The natural sciences have just as great an educational value,"
put in Pestsov. "Take astronomy, take botany, or zoology, with its
system of general principles."
  "I cannot quite agree with that," responded Alexei Alexandrovich.
"It seems to me that one must admit that the very process of
studying the forms of language has a peculiarly favorable influence on
intellectual development. Moreover, it cannot be denied that the
influence of the classical authors is in the highest degree moral,
while, unfortunately, with the study of the natural sciences are
associated the false and noxious doctrines which are the curse of
our day."
  Sergei Ivanovich would have said something, but Pestsov
interrupted him in his rich bass. He began warmly contesting the
justice of this view. Sergei Ivanovich waited serenely to speak,
obviously with a convincing reply ready.
  "But," said Sergei Ivanovich, smiling subtly, and addressing
Karenin, "one must allow that to weigh all the advantages and
disadvantages of classical and scientific studies is a difficult task,
and the question which form of education was to be preferred would not
have been so quickly and conclusively decided if there had not been in
favor of classical education, as you expressed it just now, its moral-
disons le mot- antinihilist influence."
  "Undoubtedly."
  "If it had not been for the distinctive property of antinihilistic
influence on the side of classical studies, we should have
considered the subject more, have weighed the arguments on both
sides," said Sergei Ivanovich with a subtle smile, "we should have
given elbowroom to both tendencies. But now we know that these
little pills of classical learning possess the medicinal property of
antinihilism, and we boldly prescribe them to our patients.... But
what if they had no such medicinal property?" he added his pinch of
Attic salt.
  At Sergei Ivanovich's little pills everyone laughed; Turovtsin in
especial roared loudly and jovially, glad at last to have found
something to laugh at- all he ever looked for in listening to
conversation.
  Stepan Arkadyevich had not made a mistake in inviting Pestsov.
With Pestsov intellectual conversation never flagged for an instant.
Directly Sergei Ivanovich had concluded the conversation with his
jest, Pestsov promptly started a new one.
  "I can't agree even," said he, "that the government had that aim.
The government obviously is guided by abstract considerations, and
remains indifferent to the influence its measures may exercise. The
education of women, for instance, would naturally be regarded as
likely to be harmful, but the government opens schools and
universities for women."
  And the conversation at once passed to the new subject of the
education of women.
  Alexei Alexandrovich expressed the idea that the education of
women is apt to be confounded with the emancipation of women, and that
it is only so that it can be considered dangerous.
  "I consider, on the contrary, that the two questions are inseparably
connected together," said Pestsov; "it is a vicious circle. Woman is
deprived of rights from lack of education, and the lack of education
results from the absence of rights. We must not forget that the
subjection of women is so complete, and dates from such distant
ages, that we are often unwilling to recognize the gulf that separates
them from us," said he.
  "You mentioned rights," said Sergei Ivanovich, waiting till
Pestsov had finished, "meaning the right of sitting on juries, of
voting, of presiding at councils, the right of entering the civil
service, of sitting in parliament...."
  "Undoubtedly."
  "But if women, as a rare exception, can occupy such positions, it
seems to me you are wrong in using the expression 'rights'. It would
be more correct to say duties. Every man will agree that in doing
the duty of a juryman, a witness, a telegraph clerk, we feel we are
performing duties. And, therefore, it would be correct to say that
women are seeking duties, and quite legitimately. And one can but
sympathize with this desire to assist in the general labor of man."
  "Quite so," Alexei Alexandrovich assented. "The question, I imagine,
is simply whether they are fitted for such duties."
  "They will most likely be perfectly fitted," said Stepan
Arkadyevich, "when education has become general among them. We see
this..."
  "How about the proverb?" said the Prince, who had a long while
been intent on the conversation, his mocking little eyes twinkling. "I
can say it before my daughters: her hair is long, but her wit is
short...."
  "Just what they thought of the Negroes before their emancipation!"
said Pestsov angrily.
  "What seems strange to me is that women should seek fresh duties,"
said Sergei Ivanovich, "while we see, unhappily, that men usually
try to avoid them."
  "Duties are bound up with rights- power, money, honor; those are
what women are seeking," said Pestsov.
  "Just as though I should seek the right to be a wet nurse, and
feel injured because women are paid for the work, while no one will
take me," said the old Prince.
  Turovtsin exploded in a loud roar of laughter, and Sergei
Ivanovich regretted that he had not made this comparison. Even
Alexei Alexandrovich smiled.
  "Yes, but a man can't nurse a baby," said Pestsov, "while a
woman..."
  "No, there was an Englishman who did suckle his baby on board ship,"
said the old Prince, feeling this freedom in conversation
permissible before his own daughters.
  "There are as many such Englishmen as there would be women
officials," said Sergei Ivanovich.
  "Yes, but what is a girl to do who has no family?" put in Stepan
Arkadyevich, thinking of Masha Chibisova, whom he had had in his
mind all along, in sympathizing with Pestsov and supporting him.
  "If the story of such a girl were thoroughly sifted, you would
find she had abandoned a family- her own or a sister's, where she
might have found a woman's duties," Darya Alexandrovna broke in
unexpectedly, in a tone of exasperation, probably suspecting what sort
of girl Stepan Arkadyevich had in mind.
  "But we take our stand on principle, on the ideal," replied
Pestsov in his sonorous bass. "Woman desires to have the right to be
independent, educated. She is oppressed, humiliated by the
consciousness of her disabilities."
  "And I'm oppressed and humiliated that they won't engage me at the
Foundling Asylum," the old Prince said again, to the huge delight of
Turovtsin, who in his mirth dropped his asparagus with the thick end
in the sauce.
                             XI.

  Everyone took part in the conversation except Kitty and Levin. At
first, when they were talking of the influence that one people has
on another, there rose to Levin's mind what he had to say on the
subject. But these ideas, once of such importance in his eyes,
seemed to come into his brain as in a dream, and had now not the
slightest interest for him. It even struck him as strange that they
should be so eager to talk of what was of no use to anyone. Kitty,
too, one would have supposed, should have been interested in what they
were saying of the rights and education of women. How often she had
mused on the subject, thinking of her friend abroad, Varenka, of her
painful state of dependence; how often she had wondered about
herself as to what would become of her if she did not marry, and how
often she had argued with her sister about it! But now it did not
interest her at all. She and Levin had a conversation of their own,
yet not a conversation, but a sort of mysterious communication,
which brought them every moment nearer, and stirred in both a sense of
glad terror before the unknown into which they were entering.
  At first Levin, in answer to Kitty's question how he could have seen
her last year in the carriage, told her that he had been coming home
from the mowing along the highroad and had met her.
  "It was very, very early in the morning. You were probably only just
awake. Your maman was asleep in her corner. It was an exquisite
morning. I was walking along wondering who it could be in the
four-in-hand. It was a splendid set of four horses with bells, and
in a second you flashed by, and I saw you at the window- you were
sitting, like this; holding the strings of your cap in both hands, and
in awfully deep thought about something," he said, smiling. "How I
should like to know what you were thinking about then! Something
important?"
  "Wasn't I dreadfully untidy?" she wondered, but seeing the smile
of ecstasy these reminiscences called up, she felt that the impression
she had made had been very good. She blushed and laughed with delight:
  "Really I don't remember."
  "How nicely Turovtsin laughs!" said Levin, admiring his humid eyes
and heaving chest.
  "Have you known him long?" asked Kitty.
  "Oh, everyone knows him!"
  "And I see you think he's a horrid man?"
  "Not horrid, but there's nothing in him."
  "Oh, you're wrong! And you must give up thinking so directly!"
said Kitty. "I used to have a very poor opinion of him too, but he's
an awfully fine and wonderfully goodhearted man. He has a heart of
gold."
  "How could you find out what sort of heart he has?"
  "We are great friends. I know him very well. Last winter, soon
after... you came to see us," she said, with a guilty and at the
same time a confiding smile, "all Dolly's children had scarlatina, and
he happened to come to see her. And only fancy," she said in a
whisper, "he felt so sorry for her that he stayed and began to help
her look after the children. Yes, and for three weeks he stopped
with them, and looked after the children like a nurse."
  "I am telling Konstantin Dmitrievich about Turovtsin and the
scarlatina," she said, bending over to her sister.
  "Yes, it was wonderful, noble!" said Dolly, glancing toward
Turovtsin, who had become aware they were talking of him, and
smiling gently to him. Levin glanced once more at Turovtsin, and
wondered how it was he had not realized all this man's goodness
before.
  "I'm sorry, I'm sorry, and I'll never think ill of people again!" he
said gaily, genuinely expressing what he felt at the moment.
                             XII.

  Connected with the conversation that had sprung up on the rights
of women there were certain questions as to the inequality of rights
in marriage, improper to discuss before the ladies. Pestsov had
several times during dinner touched upon these questions, but Sergei
Ivanovich and Stepan Arkadyevich carefully drew him off them.
  When they rose from the table and the ladies had gone out, Pestsov
did not follow them, but, addressing Alexei Alexandrovich, began to
expound the chief ground of inequality. The inequality in marriage, in
his opinion, lay in the fact that the infidelity of the wife and
infidelity of the husband are punished unequally, both by the law
and by public opinion.
  Stepan Arkadyevich went hurriedly up to Alexei Alexandrovich and
offered him a cigar.
  "No, I don't smoke," Alexei Alexandrovich answered calmly, and, as
though purposely wishing to show that he was not afraid of the
subject, he turned to Pestsov with a chilly smile.
  "I imagine that such a view has a foundation in the very nature of
things," he said, and would have gone on to the drawing room. But at
this point Turovtsin broke suddenly and unexpectedly into the
conversation, addressing Alexei Alexandrovich.
  "You heard, perhaps, about Priachnikov?" said Turovtsin, warmed up
by the champagne he had drunk, and long waiting for an opportunity
to break the silence that had weighed on him. "Vassia Priachnikov," he
said, with a good-natured smile on his moist, red lips, addressing
himself principally to the most important guest, Alexei Alexandrovich,
"they told me today he fought a duel with Kvitsky at Tver, and has
killed him."
  Just as it always seems that one bruises oneself on a sore place, so
Stepan Arkadyevich felt now that the conversation would by ill luck
fall at any moment on Alexei Alexandrovich's sore spot. He would again
have got his brother-in-law away, but Alexei Alexandrovich himself
inquired, with curiosity:
  "What did Priachnikov fight about?"
  "His wife. Acted like a man, he did! Called him out and shot him!"
  "Ah!" said Alexei Alexandrovich indifferently, and, lifting his
eyebrows, he went into the drawing room.
  "How glad I am you have come," Dolly said with a frightened smile,
meeting him in the outer drawing room. "I must talk to you. Let's
sit here."
  Alexei Alexandrovich, with the same expression of indifference,
due to his lifted eyebrows, sat down beside Darya Alexandrovna, and
smiled affectedly.
  "It's fortunate," said he, "especially as I meant to ask you to
excuse me, and to be taking leave. I have to start tomorrow."
  Darya Alexandrovna was firmly convinced of Anna's innocence, and she
felt herself growing pale and her lips quivering with anger at this
frigid, unfeeling man, who was so calmly intending to ruin her
innocent friend.
  "Alexei Alexandrovich," she said, with desperate resolution
looking him in the face, "I asked you about Anna; you made me no
answer. How is she?"
  "She is, I believe, quite well, Darya Alexandrovna," replied
Alexei Alexandrovich, without looking at her.
  "Alexei Alexandrovich, forgive me, I have no right... But I love
Anna as a sister, and esteem her; I beg, I beseech you to tell me what
is wrong between you? What fault do you find with her?"
  Alexei Alexandrovich frowned, and, almost closing his eyes,
dropped his head.
  "I presume that your husband has told you the grounds on which I
consider it necessary to change my attitude to Anna Arkadyevna?" he
said, without looking her in the face, but eying with displeasure
Shcherbatsky, who was walking across the drawing room.
  "I don't believe it, I don't believe it- I can't believe it!"
Dolly said, clasping her bony hands before her with a vigorous
gesture. She rose quickly and laid her hand on Alexei
Alexandrovich's sleeve. "We shall be disturbed here. Come this way,
please."
  Dolly's agitation had an effect on Alexei Alexandrovich. He got up
and submissively followed her to the schoolroom. They sat down at a
table covered with an oilcloth cut in slits by penknives.
  "I don't- I don't believe it!" Dolly said, trying to catch his
glance, still avoiding her.
  "One cannot disbelieve facts, Darya Alexandrovna," said he, with
an emphasis on the word facts.
  "But what has she done?" said Darya Alexandrovna. "What,
precisely, has she done?"
  "She has forsaken her duty, and deceived her husband. That's what
she has done," said he.
  "No, no, it can't be! No, for God's sake, you are mistaken," said
Dolly, putting her hands to her temples and closing her eyes.
  Alexei Alexandrovich smiled coldly, with his lips alone, meaning
to signify to her and himself the firmness of his conviction; but this
warm defense, though it could not shake him, reopened his wound. He
began to speak with greater heat.
  "It is extremely difficult to be mistaken when a wife herself
informs her husband of the fact- informs him that eight years of her
life, and a son, are all a mistake, and that she wants to begin life
anew," he said angrily, with a snort.
  "Anna and sin- I cannot connect them, I cannot believe it!"
  "Darya Alexandrovna," he said, now looking straight into Dolly's
kindly, troubled face, and feeling that his tongue was being
loosened in spite of himself, "I would give a great deal for doubt
to be still possible. When I doubted, I was miserable, but it was
better than now. When I doubted, I had hope; but now there is no hope,
and still I doubt everything. I am in such doubt of everything that
I even hate my son, and sometimes do not believe he is my son. I am
very unhappy."
  He had no need to say that. Darya Alexandrovna had seen that as soon
as he glanced into her face; and she felt sorry for him, and her faith
in the innocence of her friend began to waver.
  "Oh, this is awful, awful! But can it be true that you are
resolved on a divorce?"
  "I am resolved on extreme measures. There is nothing else for me
to do."
  "Nothing else to do, nothing else to do..." she replied, with
tears in her eyes. "Oh no, don't say there's nothing else to do!"
she said.
  "What is horrible in a misfortune of this kind is that one cannot,
as in any other- in loss, in death- bear one's trouble in peace, but
that one must act," said he, as though guessing her thought. "One must
get out of the humiliating position in which one is placed; one
can't live a trois."
  "I understand, I quite understand that," said Dolly, and her head
sank. She was silent for a little, thinking of herself, of her own
grief in her family, and all at once, with an impulsive movement,
she raised her head and clasped her hands with an imploring gesture.
"But wait a little! You are a Christian. Think of her! What will
become of her, if you cast her off?"
  "I have thought, Darya Alexandrovna- I have thought a great deal,"
said Alexei Alexandrovich. His face turned red in patches, and his dim
eyes looked straight before him. Darya Alexandrovna at that moment
pitied him with all her heart. "That indeed was what I did when she
herself made known to me my humiliation; I left everything as of
old. I gave her a chance to reform, I tried to save her. And with what
result? She would not regard the least request- that she should
observe decorum," he said, getting heated. "One may save anyone who
does not want to be ruined; but if the whole nature is so corrupt,
so depraved, that ruin itself seems to her salvation, what's to be
done?"
  "Anything, only not divorce!" answered Darya Alexandrovna.
  "But what is anything?"
  "No, it is awful! She will be no one's wife; she will be lost!"
  "What can I do?" said Alexei Alexandrovich, raising his shoulders
and his eyebrows. The recollection of his wife's last act had so
incensed him that he had become frigid, as at the beginning of the
conversation. "I am very grateful for your sympathy, but I must be
going," he said, getting up.
  "No, wait a minute. You must not ruin her. Wait a little; I will
tell you about myself. I was married, and my husband deceived me; in
anger and jealousy I would have thrown up everything, I would
myself... But I came to myself again; and who did it? Anna saved me.
And here I am living on. The children are growing up, my husband has
come back to his family, and feels his fault, is growing purer,
better, and I live on... I have forgiven it, and you ought to
forgive!"
  Alexei Alexandrovich heard her, but her words had no effect on him
now. All the hatred of that day when he had resolved on a divorce
had sprung up again in his soul. He shook himself, and said in a
shrill loud voice:
  "Forgive I cannot, and do not wish to, and I regard it as wrong. I
have done everything for this woman, and she has trodden it all in the
mud to which she is kin. I am not a spiteful man, I have never hated
anyone, but I hate her with my whole soul, and I cannot even forgive
her, because I hate her too much for all the wrong she has done me!"
he said, with tears of hatred in his voice.
  "Love those that hate you..." Darya Alexandrovna whispered,
timorously.
  Alexei Alexandrovich smiled contemptuously. That he knew long ago,
but it could not be applied to his case.
  "Love those that hate you, but to love those one hates is
impossible. Forgive me for having troubled you. Everyone has enough to
bear in his own grief!" And, regaining his self-possession, Alexei
Alexandrovich quietly took leave and went away.
                             XIII.

  When they rose from the table, Levin would have liked to follow
Kitty into the drawing room; but he was afraid she might dislike this,
as too obviously paying her attention. He remained in the little
ring of men, taking part in the general conversation, and, without
looking at Kitty, he was aware of her movements, her looks, and the
place where she was in the drawing room.
  He did at once, and without the smallest effort, keep the promise he
had made her- always to think well of all men, and to like everyone
always. The conversation fell on the village commune, in which Pestsov
saw a sort of special principle, called by him the choral principle.
Levin did not agree with Pestsov, nor with his brother, who had a
special attitude of his own, both admitting yet not admitting the
significance of the Russian commune. But he talked to them, simply
trying to reconcile and soften their differences. He was not in the
least interested in what he said himself, and even less so in what
they said; all he wanted was that they and everyone should be happy
and contented. He knew now the one thing of importance; and that one
thing was at first there, in the drawing room, and then began moving
across, and came to a standstill at the door. Without turning round he
felt her eyes fixed on him, and her smile, and he could not help
turning round. She was standing in the doorway with Shcherbatsky,
looking at Levin.
  "I thought you were going toward the piano," said he, going up to
her. "That's something I miss in the country- music."
  "No; we only came to fetch you, and I thank you," she said,
rewarding him with a smile that was like a gift, "for coming. What
do they want to argue for? No one ever convinces anyone, you know."
  "Yes; that's true," said Levin; "it generally happens that one
argues warmly simply because one can't make out what one's opponent
wants to prove."
  Levin had often noticed in discussions between the most
intelligent people that after enormous efforts, and an enormous
expenditure of logical subtleties and words, the disputants finally
arrived at the realization that what they had so long been
struggling to prove to one another had long ago, from the beginning of
the argument, been known to both, but that they liked different
things, and would not define what they liked for fear of its being
attacked. He had often had the experience of suddenly grasping in a
discussion what it was his opponent liked and at once liking it too,
and immediately he found himself agreeing, and then all arguments fell
away as useless. Sometimes, too, he had experienced the opposite,
expressing at last what he liked himself, which he was devising
arguments to defend, and, chancing to express it well and genuinely,
he had found his opponent at once agreeing and ceasing to dispute
his position. He tried to say this.
  She knit her brow, trying to understand. But directly he began to
illustrate his meaning, she understood at once.
  "I know: one must find out what he is arguing for, what is
precious to him, then one can..."
  She had completely guessed and expressed his badly expressed idea.
Levin smiled joyfully; he was struck by this transition from the
confused, verbose discussion with Pestsov and his brother to this
laconic, clear, almost wordless communication of the most complex
ideas.
  Shcherbatsky moved away from them, and Kitty, going up to a card
table, sat down, and, taking up the chalk, began drawing diverging
circles over the new green cloth.
  They began again on the subject that had been started at dinner- the
liberty and occupations of women. Levin was of the opinion of Darya
Alexandrovna that a girl who did not marry should find a woman's
duties in a family. He supported this view by the fact that no
family can get on without women to help; that in every family, poor or
rich, there are and must be nurses, either relations or hired.
  "No," said Kitty, blushing, but looking at him all the more
bravely with her truthful eyes; "a girl may be so circumstanced that
she cannot live in the family without humiliation, while she
herself..."
  At the hint he understood her.
  "Oh, yes," he said. "Yes, yes, yes- you're right; you're right!"
  And he saw all that Pestsov had been maintaining at dinner about the
liberty of woman, simply from getting a glimpse of the terror of an
old maid's existence and its humiliation in Kitty's heart; and
loving her, he felt that terror and humiliation, and at once gave up
his arguments.
  A silence followed. She was still drawing with the chalk on the
table. Her eyes were shining with a soft light. Under the influence of
her mood he felt in all his being a continually growing tension of
happiness.
  "Ah! I've scribbled all over the table!" she said, and, laying
down the chalk, she made a movement as though to get up.
  "What! Shall I be left alone- without her?" he thought with
horror, and he took the chalk. "Wait a minute," he said, sitting
down to the table. "I've long wanted to ask you one thing."
  He looked straight into her caressing, though frightened eyes.
  "Please, ask it."
  "Here," he said; and he wrote the initial letters, w, y, t, m: i, c,
n, b, d, t, m, n, o, t. These letters meant, "When you told me: it
could never be, did that mean never, or then?" There seemed no
likelihood that she could make out this complicated sentence; but he
looked at her as though his life depended on her understanding the
words.
  She glanced at him seriously, then leaned her puckered brow on her
hands and began to read. Once or twice she stole a look at him, as
though asking him, "Is it what I think it is?"
  "I understand," she said, flushing.
  "What is this word?" he said, pointing to the n that stood for
never.
  "It means never," she said; "but that's not true!"
  He quickly rubbed out what he had written, gave her the chalk, and
stood up. She wrote, t, i, c, n, a, d.
  Dolly was completely comforted in the depression caused by her
conversation with Alexei Alexandrovich when she caught sight of the
two figures: Kitty with the chalk in her hand, with a shy and happy
smile looking upward at Levin, and his handsome figure bending over
the table with glowing eyes fastened one minute on the table and the
next on her. He was suddenly radiant: he had understood. It meant,
"Then I could not answer differently."
  He glanced at her questioningly, timidly.
  "Only then?"
  "Yes," her smile answered.
  "And n... And now?" he asked.
  "Well, read this. I'll tell you what I should like- should like so
much!" She wrote the initial letters, i, y, c, f, a, f, w, h. This
meant, "If you could forget and forgive what happened."
  He snatched the chalk with nervous, trembling fingers, and
breaking it, wrote the initial letters of the following phrase, "I
have nothing to forget and to forgive; I have never ceased to love
you."
  She glanced at him with a smile that did not waver.
  "I understand," she said in a whisper.
  He sat down and wrote a long phrase. She understood it all, and
without asking him, "Is it this?" took the chalk and at once answered.
  For a long while he could not understand what she had written, and
often looked into her eyes. He was stupefied with happiness. He
could not supply the words she had meant; but in her charming eyes,
beaming with happiness, he saw all he needed to know. And he wrote
three letters. But he had hardly finished writing when she read them
over her arm, and herself finished and wrote the answer, "Yes."
  "You're playing secretaire?" said the old Prince. "But we must
really be getting along if you want to be in time at the theater."
  Levin got up and escorted Kitty to the door.
  In their conversation everything had been said; it had been said
that she loved him, and that she would tell her father and mother that
he would come tomorrow morning.
                             XIV.

  When Kitty had gone and Levin was left alone, he felt such
uneasiness without her and such an impatient longing to get as quickly
as possible to tomorrow morning, when he would see her again and be
plighted to her forever, that he felt afraid, as though of death, of
those fourteen hours that he had to get through without her. It was
essential for him to be with someone to talk to, so as not to be
left alone; to deceive time. Stepan Arkadyevich would have been the
companion most congenial to him, but he was going out, he said, to a
soiree- in reality to the ballet. Levin only had time to tell him he
was happy, and that he loved him, and would never, never forget what
he had done for him. The eyes and the smile of Stepan Arkadyevich
showed Levin that he comprehended that feeling fittingly.
  "Oh, so it's not time to die yet?" said Stepan Arkadyevich, pressing
Levin's hand with emotion.
  "N-n-no!" said Levin.
  Darya Alexandrovna too, as she said good-by to him, gave him a
sort of congratulation, saying, "How glad I am you have met Kitty
again! One must value old friends." Levin did not like these words
of Darya Alexandrovna's. She could not understand how lofty and beyond
her it all was, and she ought not to have dared to allude to it. Levin
said good-by to them, but, not to be left alone, he attached himself
to his brother.
  "Where are you going?"
  "I'm going to a meeting."
  "Well, I'll come with you. May I?"
  "What for? Yes, come along," said Sergei Ivanovich, smiling. "What
is the matter with you today?"
  "With me? Happiness is the matter with me!" said Levin, letting down
the window of the carriage they were driving in. "You don't mind? It's
so stifling. Happiness is all that's the matter with me! Why is it you
have never married?"
  Sergei Ivanovich smiled.
  "I am very glad- she seems a lovely gi..." Sergei Ivanovich was
beginning.
  "Don't say it! Don't say it!" shouted Levin, clutching at the collar
of his fur coat with both hands, and muffling him up in it. "She's a
lovely girl" were such simple, humble words, so out of harmony with
his feeling.
  Sergei Ivanovich laughed outright a merry laugh, which was rare with
him.
  "Well, anyway, I may say that I'm very glad of it."
  "That you may do tomorrow, tomorrow- and say no more! Nothing,
nothing- silence," said Levin, and muffling him once more in his fur
coat, he added: "I do like you so! Well, is it possible for me to be
present at the meeting?"
  "Of course it is."
  "What is your discussion about today?" asked Levin, never ceasing
smiling.
  They arrived at the meeting. Levin heard the secretary
hesitatingly read the minutes which he obviously did not himself
understand; but Levin saw from this secretary's face what a good,
fine, kindhearted person he was. This was evident from his confusion
and embarrassment in reading the minutes. Then the discussion began.
They were disputing about the reckoning off of certain sums and the
laying of certain pipes, and Sergei Ivanovich was very cutting to
two members, and said something at great length with an air of
triumph; and another member, scribbling something on a bit of paper,
began timidly at first, but afterward answered him very viciously
and delightfully. And then Sviiazhsky (he was there also) said
something too, very handsomely and nobly. Levin listened to them,
and saw clearly that this reckoning off of sums and these pipes were
not anything real, and that they were not at all angry, but were all
the finest, kindest people, and everything was as happy and charming
as possible among them. They did no harm to anyone, and were all
enjoying it. What struck Levin was that he could see through them
all today, and from little, almost imperceptible signs knew the soul
of each, and saw distinctly that they were all good at heart. And they
were all extremely fond of Levin in particular that day. This was
evident from the way they spoke to him, from the friendly,
affectionate way even those whom he did not know looked at him.
  "Well, are you contented with it?" Sergei Ivanovich asked him.
  "Very much. I never supposed it was so interesting, nice, capital!"
  Sviiazhsky went up to Levin and invited him to come round to tea
with him. Levin was utterly at a loss to comprehend or recall what
it was he had disliked in Sviiazhsky, what he had failed to find in
him. He was a clever and wonderfully goodhearted man.
  "Most delighted," he said, and asked after his wife and
sister-in-law. And from a queer association of ideas, because in his
imagination the idea of Sviiazhsky's sister-in-law was connected
with marriage, it occurred to him that there was no one to whom he
could more suitably speak of his happiness, than to Sviiazhsky's
wife and sister-in-law, and he was very glad to go to see them.
  Sviiazhsky questioned him about his improvements on his estate,
presupposing, as he always did, that there was no possibility of doing
anything not done already in Europe, and now this did not in the least
annoy Levin. On the contrary, he felt that Sviiazhsky was right,
that the whole business was of little value, and he saw the
wonderful suavity and consideration with which Sviiazhsky avoided
fully expressing his correct view. The ladies of the Sviiazhsky
household were particularly delightful. It seemed to Levin that they
knew all about it already, and sympathized with him, saying nothing
merely out of delicacy. He stayed with them one hour, two, three,
talking of all sorts of subjects, but implied in it the only thing
that filled his heart, and did not observe that he was boring them
dreadfully, and that it was long past their bedtime. Sviiazhsky went
with him into the hall, yawning and wondering at the strange humor his
friend was in. It was past one o'clock. Levin went back to his
hotel, and was dismayed at the thought that all alone now with his
impatience he had ten hours still left to get through. The servant,
whose turn it was to be up all night, lighted his candles, and would
have gone away, but Levin stopped him. This servant, Iegor, whom Levin
had not noticed before, struck him as a very intelligent, excellent,
and, above all, a goodhearted man.
  "Well, Iegor, it's hard work not sleeping, isn't it?"
  "What's to be done! It's part of our work, you see. In a gentleman's
house it's easier; but then here one makes more."
  It appeared that Iegor had a family- three boys and a daughter, a
seamstress, whom he wanted to marry to a cashier in a saddler's shop.
  Levin, on hearing this, informed Iegor that, in his opinion, in
marriage the great thing was love, and that with love one would always
be happy, for happiness rests only on oneself.
  Iegor listened attentively, and obviously quite took in Levin's
idea, but by way of assent to it he enunciated, greatly to Levin's
surprise, the observation that when he had lived with good masters
he had always been satisfied with his masters, and now was perfectly
satisfied with his employer, though he was a Frenchman.
  "Wonderfully goodhearted fellow!" thought Levin.
  "Well, but you yourself, Iegor, when you got married, did you love
your wife?"
  "Ay! And why not?" responded Iegor.
  And Levin saw that Iegor too was in an excited state and intending
to express all his most heartfelt emotions.
  "My life, too, has been a wonderful one. From a child up..." he
was beginning with flashing eyes, apparently catching Levin's
enthusiasm, just as people catch yawning.
  But at that moment a ring was heard. Iegor departed, and Levin was
left alone. He had eaten scarcely anything at dinner, had refused
tea and supper at Sviiazhsky's, but he was incapable of thinking of
supper. He had not slept the previous night, but was incapable of
thinking of sleep either. His room was cold, but he was oppressed by
heat. He opened both the movable panes in his windows and sat down
on the table opposite the open panes. Over the snow-covered roofs
could be seen a decorated cross, with chains, and above it the
rising triangle of Auriga, with the yellowish light of Capella. He
gazed at the cross, then at the star, drank in the fresh freezing
air that flowed evenly into the room, and followed as though in a
dream the images and memories that rose in his imagination. At four
o'clock he heard steps in the passage and peeped out of the door. It
was the gambler Miaskin, whom he knew, coming from the club. He walked
gloomily, frowning and coughing. "Poor, unlucky fellow!" thought
Levin, and tears came into his eyes from love and pity for this man.
He would have talked with him, and tried to comfort him, but
remembering that he had nothing but his shirt on, he changed his
mind and sat down again at the open pane to bathe in the cold air
and gaze at the exquisite lines of the cross, silent, but full of
meaning for him, and the mounting lurid yellow star. At six o'clock
there was a noise of people polishing the floors, and church bells
ringing to some divine service, and Levin felt that he was beginning
to get frozen. He closed the pane, washed, dressed, and went out
into the street.
                             XV.

  The streets were still empty. Levin went to the house of the
Shcherbatskys. The visitors' doors were closed and everything was
asleep. He walked back, went into his room again, and asked for
coffee. The day servant, not Iegor this time, brought it to him. Levin
would have entered into conversation with him, but a bell rang for the
servant, and he went out. Levin tried to drink coffee and take a
bite of a roll, but his mouth was quite at a loss what to do with
the roll. Levin, rejecting the roll, put on his coat and went out
again for a walk. It was nine o'clock when he reached the
Shcherbatskys' steps the second time. In the house they were only just
up, and the cook came out to go marketing. He had to get through at
least two hours more.
  All that night and morning Levin lived perfectly unconsciously,
and felt perfectly lifted out of the conditions of material life. He
had eaten nothing for a whole day, he had not slept for two nights,
had spent several hours undressed in the frozen air, and felt not only
fresher and stronger than ever, but felt utterly independent of his
body; he moved without muscular effort, and felt as if he could do
anything. He was convinced he could fly upward or lift the corner of
the house, if need be. He spent the remainder of the time in the
street, incessantly looking at his watch and gazing about him.
  And what he saw then, he never saw again after. Especially the
children going to school, the blue-gray doves fluttering down from the
roofs to the pavement, and the little loaves covered with flour, set
out by an unseen hand, touched him. Those loaves, those doves, and
those two boys were not of this earth. It all happened at the same
time: a boy ran toward a dove and glanced smiling at Levin; the
dove, with a whir of her wings, darted away, flashing in the sun, amid
grains of snow that quivered in the air, while from a little window
there came a smell of fresh-baked bread, and the loaves were set
out. All of this together was so extraordinarily resplendent that
Levin laughed and cried with delight. Going a long way round by
Gazetny Lane and Kislovka, he went back again to the hotel, and,
putting his watch before him, sat down to wait for twelve o'clock.
In the next room they were talking about some sort of machines, and
swindling, and coughing their morning coughs. They did not realize
that the hand was near twelve. The hand reached it. Levin went out
on the steps. The sleigh drivers clearly knew all about it. They
crowded round Levin with happy faces, quarreling among themselves, and
offering their services. Trying not to offend the other sleigh
drivers, and promising to drive with them too, Levin took one and told
him to drive to the Shcherbatskys'. The sleigh driver was splendid
in a white shirt collar, sticking out over his overcoat and into his
strong, full-blooded red neck. The sleigh was high and comfortable,
and altogether such a one as Levin never drove in after, and the horse
was a good one, and tried to gallop yet didn't seem to move. The
driver knew the Shcherbatskys' house, and drew up at the entrance,
squaring his arms and saying a "Whoa!" especially indicative of
respect for his fare. The Shcherbatskys' hall porter certainly knew
all about it. This was evident from the smile in his eyes and the
way he said:
  "Well, it's a long while since you've been to see us, Konstantin
Dmitrievich!"
  Not only did he know all about it, but he was unmistakably delighted
and making efforts to conceal his joy. Looking into his kindly old
eyes, Levin realized even something new in his happiness.
  "Are they up?"
  "Pray walk in! Leave it here," said he, smiling, as Levin would have
come back to take his hat. That meant something.
  "To whom shall I announce your honor?" asked the footman.
  The footman, though a young man, and one of the new school of
footmen- a dandy- was a very kindhearted, good fellow, and he too knew
all about it.
  "The Princess... the Prince... the young Princess..." said Levin.
  The first person he saw was Mademoiselle Linon. She walked across
the room, and her ringlets and her face were beaming. He had barely
spoken to her, when suddenly he heard the rustle of a skirt at the
door, and Mademoiselle Linon vanished from Levin's eyes, and a
joyful terror came over him at the nearness of his happiness.
Mademoiselle Linon was in great haste, and, leaving him, went out at
the other door. Directly she had gone out, swift, swift light steps
sounded on the parquet, and his bliss, his life, his own self- what
was best in himself, what he had so long sought and longed for- was
quickly, so quickly approaching him. She did not walk, but seemed,
by some unseen force, to float toward him.
  He saw nothing but her clear, truthful eyes, frightened by the
same bliss of love that flooded his heart. Those eyes were shining
nearer and nearer, blinding him with their light of love. She
stopped close to him, touching him. Her hands rose and dropped on
his shoulders.
  She had done all she could- she had run up to him and given
herself up entirely, shy and happy. He put his arms round her, and
pressed his lips to her mouth, which sought his kiss.
  She too had not slept all night, and had been expecting him all
the morning.
  Her mother and father had consented without demur, and were happy in
her happiness. She had been waiting for him. She wanted to be the
first to tell him her happiness and his. She had got ready to see
him alone, and had been delighted at the idea, and had been shy and
ashamed, and did not know herself what she was to do. She had heard
his steps and voice, and had waited at the door for Mademoiselle Linon
to go. Mademoiselle Linon had gone away. Without thinking, without
asking herself how and what, she had gone up to him, and did as she
was doing.
  "Let us go to mamma!" she said, taking him by the hand. For a long
while he could say nothing, not so much because he was afraid of
desecrating the loftiness of his emotion by a word, as that every time
he tried to say something, instead of words he felt that tears of
happiness were welling up. He took her hand and kissed it.
  "Can it be true?" he said at last in a choked voice. "I can't
believe you love me, dear!"
  She smiled at that "dear," and at the timidity with which he glanced
at her.
  "Yes!" she said significantly, deliberately. "I am so happy!"
  Without letting go his hand, she went into the drawing room. The
Princess, seeing them, breathed quickly, and immediately began to cry,
and then immediately began to laugh, and, with a vigorous step Levin
had not expected, ran up to him, and hugging his head, kissed him,
wetting his cheeks with her tears.
  "So it is all settled! I am glad. Love her. I am glad... Kitty!"
  "You've not been long settling things," said the old Prince,
trying to seem unmoved; but Levin noticed that his eyes were wet
when he turned to him. "I've long- always- wished for this!" said
the Prince, taking Levin by the arm and drawing him toward himself.
"Even when this little featherhead fancied..."
  "Papa!" shrieked Kitty, and shut his mouth with her hands.
  "Well, I won't!" he said. "I'm very, very... plea... Oh, what a fool
I am...."
  He embraced Kitty, kissed her face, her hand, her face again, and
made the sign of the cross over her.
  And there came over Levin a new feeling of love for this man, the
old Prince, till then so little known to him, when he saw how slowly
and tenderly Kitty kissed his muscular hand.
                             XVI.

  The Princess was sitting in her armchair, silent and smiling; the
Prince sat down beside her. Kitty stood by her father's chair, still
holding his hand. All were silent.
  The Princess was the first to put everything into words, and to
translate all thoughts and feelings into practical questions. And
all felt equally strange and painful for the first minute.
  "When is it to be? We must have the benediction and announcement.
And when's the wedding to be? What do you think, Alexandre?
  "Here he is," said the old Prince, pointing to Levin- "he's the
principal person in the matter."
  "When?" said Levin blushing. "Tomorrow. If you ask me, I should say,
the benediction today, and the wedding tomorrow."
  "Come, mon cher, that's nonsense!"
  "Well, in a week."
  "He's quite mad."
  "No, why so?"
  "Well, upon my word!" said the mother, smiling, delighted at this
haste. "How about the trousseau?"
  "Will there really be a trousseau and all that?" Levin thought
with horror. "But can the trousseau and the benediction and all
that- can it spoil my happiness? Nothing can spoil it!" He glanced
at Kitty and noticed that she was not in the least, not in the very
least, disturbed by the idea of the trousseau. "Then it must be all
right," he thought.
  "Oh, I know nothing about it; I only said what I should like," he
said apologetically.
  "We'll talk it over, then. The benediction and announcement can take
place now. That's very well."
  The Princess went up to her husband, kissed him, and would have gone
away, but he held her back, embraced her, and tenderly, as a young
lover, kissed her several times, smiling. The old people were
obviously muddled for a moment, and did not quite know whether it
was they who were in love again or their daughter. When the Prince and
the Princess had gone, Levin went up to his betrothed and took her
hand. He was self-possessed now and could speak, and he had a great
deal he wanted to tell her. But he did not say at all what he had to
say.
  "How I knew it would be so! I never hoped for it; and yet in my
heart I was always sure," he said. "I believe that it was ordained."
  "And I?" she said. "Even when..." She stopped and went on again,
looking at him resolutely with her truthful eyes, "Even when I
thrust my happiness from me. I always loved you only, but I was
carried away. I ought to tell you... Can you forgive it?"
  "Perhaps it was for the best. You will have to forgive me so much. I
ought to tell you..."
  This was one of the things he had meant to speak about. He had
resolved from the first to tell her two things- that he was not chaste
as she was, and that he was not a believer. It was agonizing, but he
considered he ought to tell her both these facts.
  "No, not now, later!" he said.
  "Very well, later, but you must certainly tell me. I'm not afraid of
anything. I want to know everything. Now it is settled."
  He added:
  "Settled that you'll take me whatever I may be- you won't give me
up? Yes?"
  "Yes, yes."
  Their conversation was interrupted by Mademoiselle Linon, who with
an affected but tender smile came to congratulate her favorite
pupil. Before she had gone, the servants came in with their
congratulations. Then relations arrived, and there began that state of
blissful absurdity from which Levin did not emerge till the day
after his wedding. Levin was in a continual state of awkwardness and
discomfort, but the intensity of his happiness went on increasing
all the while. He felt continually that a great deal was being
expected of him- what, he did not know; and he did everything he was
told, and it all gave him happiness. He had thought his engagement
would have nothing about it like others, that the ordinary
conditions of engaged couples would spoil his special happiness; but
it ended in his doing exactly as other people did, and his happiness
being only increased thereby and becoming more and more special,
more and more unlike anything that had ever happened.
  "Now we shall have sweetmeats to eat," said Mademoiselle Linon-
and Levin drove off to buy sweetmeats.
  "Well, I'm very glad," said Sviiazhsky. "I advise you to get the
bouquets from Fomin's."
  "Oh, are they wanted?" And he drove to Fomin's.
  His brother recommended lending money to him, as he would have so
many expenses, presents to give...
  "Oh, are presents wanted?" And he galloped to Foulde's.
  And at the confectioner's, and at Fomin's, and at Foulde's he saw
that he was expected; that they were pleased to see him, and prided
themselves on his happiness, just as everyone did whom he had to do
with during those days. What was extraordinary was that everyone not
only liked him, but even people previously unsympathetic, cold, and
callous, were enthusiastic over him, gave way to him in everything,
treated his feelings with tenderness and delicacy, and shared his
conviction that he was the happiest man in the world because his
betrothed was beyond perfection. Kitty too felt the same thing. When
Countess Nordstone ventured to hint that she had hoped for something
better, Kitty was so angry and proved so conclusively that nothing
in the world could be better than Levin, that Countess Nordstone had
to admit it, and in Kitty's presence never met Levin without a smile
of ecstatic admiration.
  The confession he had promised was the one painful incident of
this time. He consulted the old Prince, and with his sanction gave
Kitty his diary, in which there was written the confession that
tortured him. He had written this diary at the time with a view to his
future wife. Two things caused him anguish: his lack of purity and his
lack of faith. His confession of unbelief passed unnoticed. She was
religious, had never doubted the truths of religion, but his
external unbelief did not affect her in the least. Through love she
knew all his soul, and in his soul she saw what she wanted, and that
such a state of soul should be called unbelieving was to her a
matter of no account. The other confession set her weeping bitterly.
  Levin, not without an inner struggle, handed her his diary. He
knew that between him and her there could not be, and should not be,
any secrets, and so he had decided that so it must be. But he had
not realized what an effect it would have on her, he had not put
himself in her place. It was only when the same evening he came to
their house before the theater, went into her room, and saw her
tearstained, pitiful, sweet face, miserable with the suffering he
had caused and nothing could undo, that he felt the abyss that
separated his shameful past from her dovelike purity, and was appalled
at what he had done.
  "Take them, take these dreadful books!" she said, pushing away the
notebooks lying before her on the table. "Why did you give them me?
No, it was better anyway," she added, touched by his despairing
face. "But it's awful, awful!"
  His head sank, and he was silent. He could say nothing.
  "You can't forgive me," he whispered.
  "Yes, I forgive you; but it's horrible!"
  But his happiness was so immense that this confession did not
shatter it, it only added another shade to it. She forgave him; but
from that time, more than ever, he considered himself unworthy of her,
morally bowed down lower than ever before her, and prized more
highly than ever his undeserved happiness.
                             XVII.

  Unconsciously going over in his memory the conversations that had
taken place during and after dinner, Alexei Alexandrovich returned
to his solitary room. Darya Alexandrovna's words about forgiveness had
aroused in him nothing but annoyance. The applicability or
nonapplicability of the Christian precept to his own case was too
difficult a question to be discussed lightly, and this question had
long ago been answered by Alexei Alexandrovich in the negative. Of all
that had been said, what stuck most in his memory was the phrase of
stupid, good-natured Turovtsin: "Acted like a man, he did! Called
him out and shot him!" Everyone had apparently shared this feeling,
though from politeness they had not expressed it.
  "But the matter is settled; it's useless thinking about it,"
Alexei Alexandrovich told himself. And thinking of nothing but the
journey before him, and the revision work he had to do, he went into
his room and asked the porter who escorted him where his man was;
the porter said that the man had just gone out. Alexei Alexandrovich
ordered tea to be sent him, sat down to the table, and, taking the
schedule, began considering the route of his journey.
  "Two telegrams," said his valet, coming into the room. "I beg your
pardon, Your Excellency; I'd just stepped out this very minute."
  Alexei Alexandrovich took the telegrams and opened them. The first
telegram was the announcement of Stremov's appointment to the very
post Karenin had coveted. Alexei Alexandrovich flung the telegram
down, and, flushing, got up and began to pace up and down the room.
"Quos vult perdere dementat," he said, meaning by quos the persons
responsible for this appointment. He was not so much annoyed at not
receiving the post, as at having been so conspicuously passed over;
but it was incomprehensible, amazing to him that they did not see that
the wordy phrasemonger Stremov was the last man fit for it. How
could they fail to see they were ruining themselves, lowering their
prestige by this appointment?
  "Something else in the same line," he said to himself bitterly,
opening the second telegram. The telegram was from his wife. Her name,
written in blue pencil, "Anna," was the first thing that caught his
eye. "I am dying; I beg, I implore you to come. I shall die easier
with your forgiveness," he read. He smiled contemptuously, and flung
down the telegram. That this was a trick and a fraud, of that- he
thought for the first minute- there could be no doubt.
  "There is no deceit she would stick at. She was near her
confinement. Perhaps it is the confinement. But what can be their aim?
To legitimize the child, to compromise me, and prevent a divorce,"
he thought. "But something was said in it: I am dying..." He read
the telegram again, and suddenly the plain meaning of what was said in
it struck him. "And if it is true?" he said to himself. "If it is true
that in the moment of agony and nearness to death she is genuinely
penitent, and I, taking it for a trick, refuse to go? That would not
only be cruel, and everyone would blame me, but it would be stupid
on my part."
  "Piotr, call a coach; I am going to Peterburg," he said to his
servant.
  Alexei Alexandrovich decided that he would go to Peterburg and see
his wife. If her illness was a trick, he would say nothing and go away
again. If she were really in danger, and wished to see him before
her death, he would forgive her if he found her alive, and pay her the
last duties if he came too late.
  All the way he thought no more of what he ought to do.
  With a sense of weariness and uncleanness from the night spent in
the train, in the early fog of Peterburg, Alexei Alexandrovich drove
through the deserted Nevsky Prospect, and stared straight before
him, without thinking of what was awaiting him. He could not think
about it, because in picturing what would happen, he could not drive
away the reflection that her death would at once remove all the
difficulty of his position. Bakers, closed shops, night cabmen, street
sweepers sweeping the pavements flashed past his eyes, and he
watched it all, trying to smother the thought of what was awaiting
him, and what he dared not hope for, and yet was hoping for. He
drove up to the steps. A hackney sleigh, and a coach with its coachman
asleep, stood at the entrance. As he went into the entry, Alexei
Alexandrovich seemed to get out his resolution from the remotest
corner of his brain, and mastered it thoroughly. Its meaning ran:
"If it's a trick, then calm contempt and departure. If truth, do
what is seemly."
  The porter opened the door before Alexei Alexandrovich rang. The
porter, Kapitonich, looked queer in an old coat, without a tie, and in
slippers.
  "How is your mistress?"
  "She was confined yesterday, successfully."
  Alexei Alexandrovich stopped short and turned white. He felt
distinctly now how intensely he had longed for her death.
  "And how is she?"
  Kornei in his morning apron ran downstairs.
  "Very ill," he answered. "There was a consultation yesterday, and
the doctor's here now."
  "Take my things," said Alexei Alexandrovich, and, feeling some
relief at the news that there was still hope of her death, he went
into the hall.
  On the hatstand there was a military overcoat. Alexei
Alexandrovich noticed it and asked:
  "Who is here?"
  "The doctor, the midwife, and Count Vronsky."
  Alexei Alexandrovich went into the inner rooms.
  In the drawing room there was no one; at the sound of his steps
the midwife came out of Anna's boudoir, in a cap with lilac ribbons.
  She went up to Alexei Alexandrovich, and with the familiarity
given by the approach of death took him by the arm and drew him toward
the bedroom.
  "Thank God you've come! She keeps on talking about you, and
nothing but you," she said.
  "Make haste with the ice!" the doctor's peremptory voice came from
the bedroom.
  Alexei Alexandrovich went into the boudoir. At her table, sitting
sideways in a low chair, was Vronsky, his face hidden in his hands,
weeping. He jumped up at the doctor's voice, took his hands from his
face, and saw Alexei Alexandrovich. Seeing the husband, he was so
overwhelmed that he sat down again, drawing his head into his
shoulders, as if he wanted to disappear; but he made an effort over
himself, got up and said:
  "She is dying. The doctors say there is no hope. I am entirely in
your power, only let me be here... though I am at your disposal. I..."
  Alexei Alexandrovich, seeing Vronsky's tears, felt a rush of that
nervous emotion always produced in him by the sight of other
people's sufferings, and, turning away his face, he moved hurriedly to
the door, without hearing the rest of the words. From the bedroom came
the sound of Anna's voice saying something. Her voice was lively,
animated, with exceedingly distinct intonations. Alexei
Alexandrovich went into the bedroom, and walked up to the bed. She was
lying with her face turned toward him. Her cheeks were flushed
crimson, her eyes glittered, her little white hands thrust out from
the cuffs of her dressing gown were playing with the quilt, twisting
it about. It seemed as though she were not only well and blooming, but
in the happiest frame of mind. She was talking rapidly, musically, and
with exceptionally correct articulation and expressive intonation.
  "Because Alexei- I am speaking of Alexei Alexandrovich (what a
strange and awful thing that both are Alexeis, isn't it?)- Alexei
would not refuse me. I should forget, he would forgive... But why
doesn't he come? He's so good, he doesn't know himself how good he is.
Ah, my God, what pangs! Give me some water, quick! Oh, that will be
bad for her- my little girl! Oh, very well then, give her to a
nurse. Yes, I agree, it's better in fact. He'll be coming; it will
hurt him to see her. Give her to the nurse."
  "Anna Arkadyevna, he has come. Here he is!" said the midwife, trying
to attract her attention to Alexei Alexandrovich.
  "Oh, what nonsense!" Anna went on, not seeing her husband. "No, give
her to me; give me my little one! He has not come yet. You say he
won't forgive me, because you don't know him. No one knows him. I'm
the only one, and it was hard for me even. I ought to know his eyes-
Seriozha has just such eyes- and I can't bear to see them because of
it. Has Seriozha had his dinner? I know everyone will forget to do it.
He would not forget. Seriozha must be moved into the corner room,
and Mariette must be asked to sleep with him."
  All of a sudden she shrank back, and was silent; and in terror, as
though expecting a blow, as though to defend herself, she raised her
hands to her face. She had seen her husband.
  "No, no!" she began. "I am not afraid of him; I am afraid of
death. Alexei, come here. I am in a hurry, because I've no time, I
haven't long left to live; the fever will begin directly and I shall
understand nothing more. Now I understand, I understand it all- I
see it all!"
  Alexei Alexandrovich's wrinkled face wore an expression of
suffering; he took her by the hand and tried to say something, but
he could not utter it; his lower lip quivered, but he still went on
struggling with his emotion, and only now and then glanced at her. And
each time he glanced at her, he saw her eyes gazing at him with such
passionate and exultant tenderness as he had never yet seen in them.
  "Wait a minute, you don't know... Stay a little, stay!..." She
stopped, as though collecting her ideas. "Yes," she began, "yes,
yes, yes! This is what I wanted to say. Don't be surprised at me.
I'm still the same... But there is another woman in me- I'm afraid
of her: she loved that man, and I tried to hate you, and could not
forget about her that used to be. That woman isn't myself. Now I'm
my real self. I'm dying now, I know I shall die- ask him. Even now I
feel- see here, the weights on my feet, on my hands, on my fingers. My
fingers- see how huge they are! But this will soon be all over... Only
one thing I want: forgive me, forgive me quite. I'm terrible, but my
nurse would tell me- the holy martyr- what was her name? She was
worse. And I'll go to Rome; there's a wilderness, and there I shall be
no trouble to anyone, only I'll take Seriozha and the little one....
No, you can't forgive me! I know, it can't be forgiven! No, no, go
away, you're too good!" She held his hand in one burning hand, while
she pushed him away with the other.
  The nervous agitation of Alexei Alexandrovich kept increasing, and
had by now reached such a point that he ceased to struggle with it. He
suddenly felt that what he had regarded as nervous agitation was on
the contrary a blissful spiritual condition that gave him all at
once a new happiness he had never known. He did not think that the
Christian law, which he had been all his life trying to follow,
enjoined on him to forgive and love his enemies; but a joyous
feeling of love and forgiveness for his enemies filled his heart. He
knelt down, and laying his head in the curve of her arm, which
burned him as with fire through the sleeve, he sobbed like a little
child. She put her arm around his head, which was beginning to grow
bald, moved toward him, and with defiant pride lifted up her eyes.
  "That is he. I knew him! Now, good-by, everyone, good-by!... They've
come again; why don't they go away?... Oh, take these fur coats off
me!"
  The doctor unloosed her hands, carefully laying her on the pillow,
and covered her up to the shoulders. She lay back submissively, and
looked before her with beaming eyes.
  "Remember one thing, that I needed nothing but forgiveness, and I
want nothing more.... Why doesn't he come?" she said, turning to the
door, toward Vronsky. "Do come, do come! Give him your hand."
  Vronsky came to the side of the bed, and seeing Anna, again hid
his face in his hands.
  "Uncover your face- look at him! He's a saint," she said. "Oh!
uncover your face, do uncover it!" she said angrily. "Alexei
Alexandrovich, do uncover his face! I want to see him."
  Alexei Alexandrovich took Vronsky's hands and drew them away from
his face, which was awful with the expression of agony and shame
upon it.
  "Give him your hand. Forgive him."
  Alexei Alexandrovich gave him his hand, not attempting to restrain
the tears that streamed from his eyes.
  "Thank God, thank God!" she said, "now everything is ready. Only
to stretch my legs a little. There, that's capital. How badly these
flowers are done- not a bit like a violet," she said, pointing to
the hangings. "My God, my God! when will it end? Give me some
morphine. Doctor, give me some morphine! Oh, my God, my God!"
  And she tossed about on the bed.
  The doctors said that it was puerperal fever, and that ninety-nine
chances in a hundred it would end in death. The whole day long there
was fever, delirium, and unconsciousness. At midnight the patient
lay without consciousness, and almost without pulse.
  The end was expected every minute.
  Vronsky had gone home, but in the morning he came to inquire, and
Alexei Alexandrovich, meeting him in the hall, said: "Better stay, she
might ask for you," and himself led him to his wife's boudoir.
Toward morning there was a return again of excitement, rapid thought
and talk, and again it ended in unconsciousness. On the third day it
was the same thing, and the doctors said there was hope. That day
Alexei Alexandrovich went into the boudoir where Vronsky was
sitting, and, closing the door, sat down opposite him.
  "Alexei Alexandrovich," said Vronsky, feeling that a statement of
the situation was coming, "I can't speak, I can't understand. Spare
me! However hard it is for you, believe me, it is more terrible for
me."
  He would have risen; but Alexei Alexandrovich took him by the hand
and said:
  "I beg you to hear me out; it is necessary. I must explain my
feelings, the feelings that have guided me, and will guide me, so that
you may not be in error regarding me. You know I had resolved on a
divorce, and had even begun to take proceedings. I won't conceal
from you that in beginning this I was in uncertainty, I was in misery;
I will confess that I was pursued by a desire to revenge myself on you
and on her. When I got the telegram, I came here with the same
feelings; I will say more- I longed for her death. But..." He
paused, pondering whether to disclose or not to disclose his feelings.
"But I saw her and forgave her. And the happiness of forgiveness has
revealed to me my duty. I forgive completely. I would offer the
other cheek, I would give my cloak if my coat be taken. I pray to
God only not to take from me the bliss of forgiveness!"
  Tears stood in his eyes, and the luminous, serene look in them
impressed Vronsky.
  "This is my position: you can trample me in the mud, make me the
laughingstock of the world- I will not abandon her, and I will never
utter a word of reproach to you," Alexei Alexandrovich went on. "My
duty is clearly marked for me; I ought to be with her, and I will
be. If she wishes to see you, I will let you know, but now I suppose
it would be better for you to go away."
  He got up, and sobs cut short his words. Vronsky too was getting up,
and in a stooping, not yet erect posture, looked up at him from
under his brows. He did not understand Alexei Alexandrovich's feeling,
but he felt that it was something higher, and even unattainable for
him with his view of life.
                             XVIII.

  After the conversation with Alexei Alexandrovich, Vronsky went out
on the steps of the Karenins' house and stood still, with difficulty
remembering where he was, and where he ought to walk or drive. He felt
disgraced, humiliated, guilty, and deprived of all possibility of
washing away his humiliation. He felt thrust out of the beaten track
along which he had so proudly and lightly walked till then. All the
habits and rules of his life that had seemed so firm, had turned out
suddenly false and inapplicable. The betrayed husband, who had figured
till that time as a pitiful creature, an incidental and somewhat
ludicrous obstacle to his happiness, had suddenly been summoned by her
herself, elevated to an awe-inspiring pinnacle, and on the pinnacle
that husband had shown himself- not malignant, not false, not
ludicrous- but kind and straightforward and grand. Vronsky could not
but feel this, and the roles were suddenly reversed. Vronsky felt
the other's elevation and his own abasement, the other's truth and his
own falsehood. He felt that the husband was magnanimous even in his
sorrow, while he had been base and petty in his deceit. But this sense
of his own humiliation before the man he had unjustly despised made up
only a small part of his misery. He felt unutterably wretched now, for
his passion for Anna, which had seemed to him of late to be growing
cooler, now that he knew he had lost her forever, was stronger than
ever it had been. He had seen all of her in her illness, had come to
know her very soul, and it seemed to him that he had never loved her
till then. And now, when he had learned to know her, to love her as
she should be loved, he had been humiliated before her, and had lost
her forever, leaving with her nothing of himself but a shameful
memory. Most terrible of all had been his ludicrous, shameful position
when Alexei Alexandrovich had pulled his hands away from his
humiliated face. He stood on the steps of the Karenins' house like one
distraught, and did not know what to do.
  "A hack, sir?" asked the porter.
  "Yes- a hack."
  On getting home, after three sleepless nights, Vronsky, without
undressing, lay prone on the sofa, clasping his hands and laying his
head on them. His head was heavy. Images, memories, and ideas of the
strangest description followed one another with extraordinary rapidity
and vividness. First it was the medicine he had poured out for the
patient and spilled out of the spoon; then the midwife's white
hands; then the queer posture of Alexei Alexandrovich on the floor
beside the bed.
  "To sleep! To forget!" he said to himself with the serene confidence
of a healthy man that if he is tired and sleepy, he will go to sleep
at once. And the same instant his head did begin to feel drowsy and he
began to drop off into forgetfulness. The waves of the sea of
unconsciousness had begun to meet over his head, when all at once it
seemed as though a violent shock of electricity had passed over him.
He started so that he leaped up on the springs of the sofa, and
leaning on his arms got on his knees in a fright. His eyes were wide
open as though he had never been asleep. The heaviness in his head and
the flabbiness in his limbs that he had felt a minute before had
suddenly gone.
  "You may trample me in the mud," he heard Alexei Alexandrovich's
words and saw him standing before him, and saw Anna's face with its
burning flush and glittering eyes, gazing with love and tenderness not
at him but at Alexei Alexandrovich; he saw his own, as he fancied,
foolish and ludicrous figure when Alexei Alexandrovich had taken his
hands away from his face. He stretched out his legs again and flung
himself on the sofa in the same position and shut his eyes.
  "To sleep! To sleep!" he repeated to himself. But with his eyes shut
he saw more distinctly than ever Anna's face as it had been on the
memorable evening before the races.
  "This cannot, and will not be, and she wants to wipe it out of her
memory. But I cannot live without it. How can we be reconciled? How
can we be reconciled?" he said aloud, and unconsciously began to
repeat these words. This repetition of words checked the rising of
fresh images and memories, which he felt were thronging in his
brain. But repeating words did not check his imagination for long.
Again, in extraordinarily rapid succession, his best moments rose
before his mind, and then his recent humiliation. "Take away his
hands," Anna's voice was saying. He takes away his hands and feels the
shame-struck and idiotic expression of his face.
  He was still lying down, trying to sleep, though he felt there was
not the smallest hope of it, and kept repeating stray words from
some chain of thought, trying by this to check the rising flood of
fresh images. He listened, and heard words repeated in a strange,
mad whisper: "You did not appreciate it, did not make enough of it.
You did not appreciate it, did not make enough of it."
  "What's this? Am I going out of my mind?" he said to himself
"Perhaps. What makes men go out of their minds- what makes men shoot
themselves?" he answered himself, and, opening his eyes, he saw with
wonder an embroidered cushion beside him, worked by Varia, his
brother's wife. He touched the tassel of the cushion, and tried to
think of Varia, of when he had seen her last. But to think of anything
extraneous was an agonizing effort. "No, I must sleep!" He moved the
cushion up, and pressed his head into it, but he had to make an effort
to keep his eyes shut. He jumped up and sat down. "That's all over for
me," he said to himself. "I must think what to do. What is left?"
His mind rapidly ran through his life apart from his love of Anna.
  "Ambition? Serpukhovskoy? Society? The Court?" He could not come
to a pause anywhere. All of it had had meaning before, but now there
was no reality in it. He got up from the sofa, took off his coat,
undid his belt, and, uncovering his hairy chest to breathe more
freely, walked up and down the room. "This is how people go mad," he
repeated, "and how they shoot themselves... to escape humiliation," he
added slowly.
  He went to the door and closed it, and then with fixed eyes and
clenched teeth he went up to the table, took a revolver, looked it
about, turned it to a loaded barrel, and sank into thought. For two
minutes, his head bent forward with an expression of an intense effort
of thought, he stood with the revolver in his hand, motionless,
thinking. "Of course," he said to himself, as though a logical,
continuous, and clear chain of reasoning had brought him to an
indubitable conclusion. In reality this "of course," so convincing
to him, was simply the result of repeating exactly the same circle
of memories and images through which he had already passed ten times
during the last hour. There were the same memories of happiness lost
forever, the same conception of the senselessness of everything to
come in life, the same consciousness of humiliation. There was the
same sequence of these images and emotions too.
  "Of course," he repeated, when for the third time his thought passed
again round the same spellbound circle of memories and images, and,
putting the revolver to the left side of his chest, and twitching
vigorously with his whole hand, as though squeezing it in his fist, he
pulled the trigger. He did not hear the sound of the shot, but a
violent blow on his chest knocked him down. He tried to clutch at
the edge of the table, dropped the revolver, staggered, and sat down
on the ground, looking about him in astonishment. He did not recognize
his room, as he looked up from the ground at the bent legs of the
table, at the wastepaper basket, and the tigerskin rug. The hurried,
creaking steps of his servant coming through the drawing room
brought him to his senses. He made an effort at thought, and was aware
that he was on the floor; and seeing blood on the tigerskin rug and on
his arm, he knew he had shot himself.
  "Idiotic! Missed!" he said, fumbling after the revolver. The
revolver was close beside him- he was groping farther off. Still
groping for it, he stretched out to the other side, and not being
strong enough to keep his balance, fell over, streaming with blood.
  The elegant, whiskered manservant, who used to be continually
complaining to his acquaintances of the delicacy of his nerves, was so
panic-stricken on seeing his master lying on the floor that he left
him losing blood while he ran for assistance. An hour later Varia, his
brother's wife, had arrived, and with the assistance of three doctors,
whom she had sent for in all directions, and who all appeared at the
same moment, she got the wounded man to bed, and remained to nurse
him.
                             XIX.

  The mistake made by Alexei Alexandrovich, when preparing to see
his wife, in having overlooked the possibility that her repentance
might be sincere, and that he might forgive her, and she might not
die- this mistake was two months after his return from Moscow
brought home to him in all its significance. But the mistake made by
him had arisen not simply from his having overlooked that contingency,
but also from the fact that, until the day of his interview with his
dying wife, he had not known his own heart. At his sick wife's bedside
he had for the first time in his life given way to that feeling of
sympathetic suffering always roused in him by the sufferings of
others, and hitherto looked on by him with shame as a harmful
weakness. And pity for her, and remorse for having desired her
death, and, most of all, the joy of forgiveness, made him at once
conscious, not simply of the relief of his own sufferings, but of a
spiritual peace he had never experienced before. He suddenly felt that
the very thing that was the source of his sufferings had become the
source of his spiritual joy; that what had seemed insolvable while
he was judging, blaming, and hating, had become clear and simple
when he forgave and loved.
  He forgave his wife and pitied her for her sufferings and her
remorse. He forgave Vronsky, and pitied him, especially after
reports reached him of his despairing action. He felt more for his son
than before. And he blamed himself now for having taken too little
interest in him. But for the little newborn baby he felt a quite
peculiar sentiment, not of pity only, but of tenderness. At first,
from a feeling of compassion alone, he had been interested in the
delicate little creature, who was not his child, and who was neglected
during her mother's illness, and would certainly have died if he had
not troubled about her; and he did not himself observe how fond he
became of her. He would go into the nursery several times a day, and
sit there for a long while, so that the nurse and wet nurses, who were
at first afraid of him, got quite used to his presence. Sometimes, for
half an hour at a stretch, he would sit silently gazing at the
saffron-red, downy, wrinkled face of the sleeping baby, watching the
movements of the frowning brows, and the plump little hands with
clenched fingers, that rubbed the little eyes and bridge of the nose
with the back of their palms. At such moments particularly Alexei
Alexandrovich had a sense of perfect peace and inward harmony, and saw
nothing extraordinary in his position, nothing that ought to be
changed.
  But, as time went on, he saw more and more distinctly that however
natural the position now seemed to him, he would not long be allowed
to remain in it. He felt that besides the blessed spiritual force
controlling his soul, there was another, a brutal force, as
powerful, or more powerful, which controlled his life, and that this
force would not allow him that humble peace he longed for. He felt
that everyone was looking at him with inquiring wonder, that he was
not understood, and that something was expected of him. Above all,
he felt the instability and unnaturalness of his relations with his
wife.
  When the softening effect of the near approach of death had passed
away, Alexei Alexandrovich began to notice that Anna was afraid of
him, ill at ease with him, and could not look him straight in the
face. She seemed to be wanting, yet not daring, to tell him something;
and, as though foreseeing that their present relations could not
continue, she seemed to be expecting something from him.
  Toward the end of February Anna's baby daughter, who had also been
named Anna, happened to fall ill. Alexei Alexandrovich was in the
nursery in the morning, and leaving orders for the doctor to be sent
for, he went to his office. On finishing his work, he returned home at
four. Going into the hall he saw a handsome footman, in a gallooned
livery and a bear-fur cape, holding a white fur cloak.
  "Who is here?" asked Alexei Alexandrovich.
  "Princess Elizaveta Fiodorovna Tverskaia," the footman answered, and
it seemed to Alexei Alexandrovich that the fellow grinned.
  During all this difficult time Alexei Alexandrovich had noticed that
his worldly acquaintances, especially women, took a peculiar
interest in him and his wife. He observed all these acquaintances with
difficulty concealing their mirth at something- the same mirth that he
had perceived in the lawyer's eyes, and, just now, in the eyes of this
footman. Everyone seemed, somehow, hugely delighted, as though just
come from a wedding. When they met him, they inquired with
ill-disguised enjoyment after his wife's health.
  The presence of Princess Tverskaia was unpleasant to Alexei
Alexandrovich from the memories associated with her, and also
because he disliked her, and he went straight to the nursery. In the
day nursery Seriozha, leaning on the table with his legs on a chair,
was drawing and chatting away merrily. The English governess, who
had during Anna's illness replaced the French one, was sitting near
the boy, knitting mignardise. She hurriedly got up, curtsied, and
pulled Seriozha.
  Alexei Alexandrovich stroked his son's hair, answered the
governess's inquiries about his wife, and asked what the doctor had
said of the baby.
  "The doctor said it was nothing serious, and he ordered a bath,
sir."
  "But she is still in pain," said Alexei Alexandrovich, listening
to the baby's screaming in the next room.
  "I think it's the wet nurse, sir," the Englishwoman said firmly.
  "What makes you think so?" he asked, stopping short.
  "It's just as it was at Countess Paul's, sir. They gave the baby
medicine, and it turned out that the baby was simply hungry: the wet
nurse had no milk, sir."
  Alexei Alexandrovich pondered, and after standing still a few
seconds he went in at the other door. The baby was lying with its head
thrown back, stiffening itself in the nurse's arms, and would not take
the plump breast offered it; and it never ceased screaming in spite of
the double hushing of the wet nurse and the other nurse, who was
bending over her.
  "Still no better?" said Alexei Alexandrovich.
  "She's very restless," answered the nurse in a whisper.
  "Miss Edwards says that perhaps the wet nurse has no milk," he said.
  "I think so too, Alexei Alexandrovich."
  "Then why didn't you say so?"
  "Who's one to say it to? Anna Arkadyevna is still ill..." said the
nurse discontentedly.
  The nurse was an old servant of the family. And in her simple
words there seemed to Alexei Alexandrovich an allusion to his
position.
  The baby screamed louder than ever, struggling and choking. The
nurse, with a gesture of despair, went to it, took it from the wet
nurse's arms, and began walking up and down, rocking it.
  "You must ask the doctor to examine the wet nurse," said Alexei
Alexandrovich.
  The smartly dressed and healthy-looking nurse, frightened at the
idea of losing her place, muttered something to herself, and, covering
her bosom, smiled contemptuously at the idea of doubts being cast on
her abundance of milk. In that smile, too, Alexei Alexandrovich saw
a sneer at his position.
  "Luckless child," said the nurse, hushing the baby, and still
walking up and down with it.
  Alexei Alexandrovich sat down, and with a despondent and suffering
face watched the nurse walking to and fro.
  When the child at last was still, and had been put in a deep bed,
and the nurse, after smoothing the little pillow, had left her, Alexei
Alexandrovich got up, and, walking awkwardly on tiptoe, approached the
baby. For a minute he was still, and with the same despondent face
gazed at the baby; but all at once a smile that moved his hair and the
skin of his forehead, came out on his face, and he went as softly
out of the room.
  In the dining room he rang the bell, and told the servant who came
in to send again for the doctor. He felt vexed with his wife for not
being anxious about this charming baby, and in this vexed humor he had
no wish to go to her; he had no wish, either, to see Princess Betsy.
But his wife might wonder why he did not go to her as usual; and so,
overcoming his disinclination, he went toward her bedroom. As he
walked over the soft rug toward the door, he could not help
overhearing a conversation he did not want to hear.
  "If he hadn't been going away, I could have understood your
refusal and his too. But your husband ought to be above that," Betsy
was saying.
  "It's not for my husband- it's for myself I don't wish it. Don't say
that!" answered Anna's excited voice.
  "Yes, but you must care to say good-by to a man who has shot himself
on your account...."
  "That's just why I don't want to."
  With a dismayed and guilty expression, Alexei Alexandrovich
stopped and would have gone back unobserved. But reflecting that
this would be undignified, he turned back again, and, clearing his
throat, he approached the bedroom. The voices were silent, and he went
in.
  Anna, in a gray dressing gown, with a crop of short clustering black
curls on her round head, was sitting on a settee. The animation died
out of her face, as it always did, at the sight of her husband; she
dropped her head and looked round uneasily at Betsy. Betsy, dressed in
the height of the latest fashion, in a hat that towered over her
head like a shade on a lamp, in a dove-colored dress with crude
oblique stripes, slanting one way on the bodice and the other way on
the skirt, was sitting beside Anna, her tall flat figure held erect.
Bowing her head, she greeted Alexei Alexandrovich with an ironical
smile.
  "Ah!" she said, as though surprised. "I'm very glad you're at
home. You never put in an appearance anywhere, and I haven't seen
you ever since Anna has been ill. I have heard all about it- your
anxiety. Yes, you're a wonderful husband!" she said, with a
significant and affable air, as though she were bestowing an order
of magnanimity on him for his conduct toward his wife.
  Alexei Alexandrovich bowed frigidly, and, kissing his wife's hand,
asked how she was.
  "Better, I think," she said, avoiding his eyes.
  "But you've rather a feverish complexion," he said, laying stress on
the word "feverish."
  "We've been talking too much," said Betsy. "I feel it's
selfishness on my part, and I am going away."
  She got up, but Anna, suddenly flushing, quickly caught at her hand.
  "No, wait a minute, please. I must tell you... no, I mean you,"
she turned to Alexei Alexandrovich, and her neck and brow were
suffused with crimson. "I won't and can't keep anything secret from
you," she said.
  Alexei Alexandrovich cracked his fingers and bowed his head.
  "Betsy's been telling me that Count Vronsky wants to come here to
say good-by before his departure for Tashkend." She did not look at
her husband, and was evidently in haste to have everything out,
however hard it might be for her. "I told her I could not receive
him."
  "You said, my dear, that it would depend on Alexei Alexandrovich,"
Betsy corrected her.
  "Oh, no, I can't receive him; and what object would there be
in..." She stopped suddenly, and glanced inquiringly at her husband
(he did not look at her). "In short, I don't wish it...."
  Alexei Alexandrovich advanced and would have taken her hand.
  Her first impulse was to jerk back her hand from the damp hand
with big swollen veins that sought hers, but with an obvious effort to
control herself she pressed his hand.
  "I am very grateful to you for your confidence, but..." he said,
feeling with confusion and annoyance that what he could decide
easily and clearly by himself, he could not discuss before Princess
Tverskaia, who to him stood for the incarnation of that brute force
which would inevitably control him in the life he led in the eyes of
the world, and hinder him from giving way to his feeling of love and
forgiveness. He stopped short, looking at Princess Tverskaia.
  "Well, good-by, my darling," said Betsy, getting up. She kissed
Anna, and went out. Alexei Alexandrovich escorted her out.
  "Alexei Alexandrovich! I know you are a truly magnanimous man," said
Betsy, stopping in the little drawing room, and with special warmth
shaking hands with him once more. "I am an outsider, but I love her
so, and respect you, that I venture to advise. Receive him. Alexei
Vronsky is the soul of honor, and he is going away to Tashkend."
  "Thank you, Princess, for your sympathy and advice. But the question
of whether my wife can or cannot see anyone she must decide herself."
  He said this from habit, lifting his brows with dignity, and
reflected immediately that whatever his words might be, there could be
no dignity in his position. And he saw this by the suppressed,
malicious, and ironical smile with which Betsy glanced at him after
this phrase.
                             XX.

  Alexei Alexandrovich took leave of Betsy in the drawing room, and
went to his wife. She was lying down, but hearing his steps she sat up
hastily in her former attitude, and looked in a scared way at him.
He saw she had been crying.
  "I am very grateful for your confidence in me." He repeated gently
in Russian the phrase he had said in Betsy's presence in French, and
sat down beside her. When he spoke to her in Russian, using the
Russian "thou" of intimacy and affection, it was insufferably
irritating to Anna. "And I am very grateful for your decision. I, too,
imagine that since he is going away, there is no sort of necessity for
Count Vronsky to come here. However, if..."
  "But I've said so already, so why repeat it?" Anna suddenly
interrupted him, with an irritation she could not succeed in
repressing. "No sort of necessity," she thought, "for a man to come
and say good-by to the woman he loves, for whom he was ready to ruin
himself, and has ruined himself, and who cannot live without him. No
sort of necessity!" She compressed her lips, and dropped her burning
eyes to his hands with their swollen veins. They were slowly rubbing
each other. "Let us never speak of it," she added more calmly.
  "I have left this question to you to decide, and I am very glad to
see..." Alexei Alexandrovich was beginning.
  "That my wish coincides with your own," she finished quickly,
exasperated at his talking so slowly while she knew beforehand all
he would say.
  "Yes," he assented; "and Princess Tverskaia's interference in the
most difficult private affairs is utterly uncalled for. She
especially..."
  "I don't believe a word of what's said about her," said Anna
quickly. "I know she really cares for me."
  Alexei Alexandrovich sighed and said nothing. She played nervously
with the tassel of her dressing gown, glancing at him with that
torturing sensation of physical repulsion for which she blamed
herself, though she could not control it. Her only desire now was to
be rid of his repelling presence.
  "I have just sent for the doctor," said Alexei Alexandrovich.
  "I am very well; what do I want the doctor for?"
  "No- the little one cries, and they say the wet nurse hasn't
enough milk."
  "Why didn't you let me nurse her, when I begged to? Anyway"
(Alexei Alexandrovich knew what was meant by that "anyway"), "she's
a baby, and they're killing her." She rang the bell and ordered the
baby to be brought her. "I begged to nurse her, I wasn't allowed to,
and now I'm blamed for it."
  "I don't blame..."
  "Yes, you do blame me! My God! Why didn't I die!" And she broke into
sobs. "Forgive me, I'm nervous, I'm unjust," she said, controlling
herself, "but do go away..."
  "No, it can't go on like this," Alexei Alexandrovich said to himself
resolutely as he left his wife's room.
  Never had the impossibility of his position in the world's eyes, and
his wife's hatred of him, and, above all, the might of that mysterious
brutal force that guided his life against his spiritual inclinations
and exacted conformity with its decrees and a change in his present
attitude to his wife- never had it been presented to him with such
distinctness as on that day. He saw clearly that all the world and
Anna expected something of him, but what exactly he could not make
out. He felt that this was rousing in his soul a feeling of anger
destructive of his peace of mind, and of all the good of his
achievement. He believed that for Anna herself it would be better to
break off all relations with Vronsky; but if they all thought this out
of the question, he was even ready to allow these relations to be
renewed, so long as the children were not disgraced, and he was not
deprived of them nor forced to change his position. Bad as this
might be, it was at any rate better than a rupture, which would put
her in a hopeless and shameful position, and deprive him of everything
he cared for. But he felt helpless; he knew beforehand that everyone
was against him, and that he would not be allowed to do what seemed to
him now so natural and right, but would be forced to do what was
wrong, though to them it seemed the proper thing.
                             XXI.

  Before Betsy had time to walk out of the drawing room, she was met
in the doorway by Stepan Arkadyevich, who had just come from
Ielisseev's, where a consignment of fresh oysters had been received.
  "Ah! Princess! What a delightful meeting!" he began. "I've been to
see you."
  "A meeting for one minute, for I'm going," said Betsy, smiling and
putting on her glove.
  "Don't put on your glove yet, Princess; let me kiss your hand.
There's nothing I'm so thankful to the revival of the old fashions for
as kissing the hand." He kissed Betsy's hand. "When shall we see
each other?"
  "You don't deserve it," answered Betsy, smiling.
  "Oh, yes, I deserve a great deal, for I've become a most serious
person. I not only manage my own domestic affairs, but other
people's too," he said, with a significant expression.
  "Oh, I'm so glad!" answered Betsy, at once understanding that he was
speaking of Anna. And, going back into the drawing room, they stood in
a corner. "He's killing her," said Betsy in a whisper full of meaning.
"It's impossible, impossible..."
  "I'm so glad you think so," said Stepan Arkadyevich, shaking his
head with a serious and sympathetically distressed expression, "that's
what I've come to Peterburg for."
  "The whole town's talking of it," she said. "It's an impossible
situation. She pines and pines away. He doesn't understand that
she's one of those women who can't trifle with their feelings. One
of two things: either let him take her away, act with energy, or
give her a divorce. This is stifling her."
  "Yes, yes... just so..." Oblonsky said, sighing.
  "That's what I've come for. At least not solely for that... I've
been made a Kammerherr; of course, one has to give thanks. But the
chief thing was having to settle this."
  "Well, God help you!" said Betsy.
  After accompanying Betsy to the outside hall, once more kissing
her hand above the glove, at the point where the pulse beats, and
murmuring to her such unseemly nonsense that she did not know
whether to laugh or to be angry, Stepan Arkadyevich went to his
sister. He found her in tears.
  Although he happened to be bubbling over with good spirits, Stepan
Arkadyevich immediately and quite naturally fell into the sympathetic,
poetically emotional tone which harmonized with her mood. He asked her
how she was, and how she had spent the morning.
  "Very, very miserably. Today, and this morning, and all past days,
and all the days to come," she said.
  "I think you're giving way to pessimism. You must rouse yourself,
you must look life in the face. I know it's hard, but..."
  "I have heard it said that women love men even for their vices,"
Anna began suddenly, "but I hate him for his virtues. I can't live
with him. Do you understand? The sight of him has a physical effect in
me- I am beside myself from it. I can't, I can't live with him. What
am I to do? I have been unhappy, and used to think one couldn't be
unhappier, but the awful state of things I am going through now I
could never have conceived. Would you believe it, that, knowing he's a
good man, a splendid man, that I'm not worth his little finger, I
still hate him. I hate him for his generosity. And there's nothing
left for me but..."
  She would have said "death," but Stepan Arkadyevich would not let
her finish.
  "You are ill and overwrought," he said; "believe me, you're
exaggerating dreadfully. There's nothing so terrible in it."
  And Stepan Arkadyevich smiled. No one else in Stepan Arkadyevich's
place, having to do with such despair, would have ventured to smile
(the smile would have seemed brutal); but in his smile there was so
much of sweetness and almost feminine tenderness that his smile did
not wound, but softened and soothed. His gentle, soothing words and
smiles were as soothing and softening as almond oil. And Anna soon
felt this.
  "No, Stiva," she said, "I'm lost, lost! Worse than lost! I can't say
yet that all is over; on the contrary, I feel that it's not over.
I'm an overstrained cord that must snap. But it's not ended yet... And
it will have a fearful end."
  "No matter, we must let the cord be loosened, little by little.
There's no position from which there is no way of escape."
  "I have thought, and thought. Only one..."
  Again he knew from her terrified eyes that this one way of escape in
her thought was death, and he would not let her say it.
  "Not at all," he said. "Listen to me. You can't see your own
position as I can. Let me tell you candidly my opinion." Again he
smiled discreetly his almond-oil smile. "I'll begin from the
beginning. You married a man twenty years older than yourself. You
married him without love and not knowing what love was. It was a
mistake, let's admit."
  "A fearful mistake!" said Anna.
  "But, I repeat, it's an accomplished fact. Then you had, let us say,
the misfortune to love a man not your husband. That was a
misfortune; but that, too, is an accomplished fact. And your husband
knew it and forgave it." He stopped at each sentence, waiting for
her to object, but she made no answer. "That's that. Now the
question is: Can you go on living with your husband? Do you wish it?
Does he wish it?"
  "I know nothing, nothing."
  "But you said yourself that you can't endure him."
  "No, I didn't say so. I deny it. I don't know anything, I don't
understand anything."
  "Yes, but let..."
  "You can't understand. I feel I'm lying head downward in a sort of
pit, but I ought not to save myself. And I can't..."
  "Never mind, we'll slip something under you and pull you out. I
understand you: I understand that you can't take it on yourself to
express your wishes, your feelings."
  "There's nothing, nothing I wish... except for it to be all over."
  "But he sees this and knows it. And do you suppose it weighs on
him any less than on you? You're wretched, he's wretched, and what
good can come of it? While divorce would solve the whole
difficulty." With some effort Stepan Arkadyevich brought out his
central idea, and looked significantly at her.
  She said nothing, and shook her cropped head in dissent. But from
the look in her face, that suddenly brightened into its former beauty,
he saw that if she did not desire this, it was simply because it
seemed to her an unattainable happiness.
  "I'm awfully sorry for you both! And how happy I should be if I
could arrange things!" said Stepan Arkadyevich, smiling more boldly.
"Don't speak, don't say a word! God grant only that I may speak as I
feel. I'm going to him."
  Anna looked at him with dreamy, shining eyes, and said nothing.
                             XXII.

  Stepan Arkadyevich, with the same somewhat solemn expression with
which he used to take his presidential chair at his board, walked into
Alexei Alexandrovich's room. Alexei Alexandrovich was walking about
his room with his hands behind his back, thinking of just what
Stepan Arkadyevich had been discussing with his wife.
  "I'm not interrupting you?" said Stepan Arkadyevich, on the sight of
his brother-in-law becoming suddenly aware of a sense of embarrassment
unusual with him. To conceal this embarrassment he took out a newly
purchased cigarette case that opened in a new way, and, sniffing the
leather, took a cigarette out of it.
  "No. Do you want anything?" Alexei Alexandrovich said reluctantly.
  "Yes, I wished... I wanted... Yes, I wanted to talk to you," said
Stepan Arkadyevich, with surprise aware of an unaccustomed timidity.
  This feeling was so unexpected and so strange that he did not
believe it was the voice of conscience telling him that what he
meant to do was wrong. Stepan Arkadyevich made an effort and struggled
with the timidity that had come over him.
  "I hope you believe in my love for my sister and my sincere
affection and respect for you," he said, reddening.
  Alexei Alexandrovich stood still and said nothing, but his face
struck Stepan Arkadyevich by its expression of an unresisting
sacrifice.
  "I intended... I wanted to have a little talk with you about my
sister and your mutual position," he said, still struggling with an
unaccustomed constraint.
  Alexei Alexandrovich smiled mournfully, looked at his
brother-in-law, and, without answering, went up to the table, took
from it an unfinished letter, and handed it to his brother-in-law.
  "I think unceasingly of the same thing. And here is what I had begun
writing, thinking I could say it better by letter, and that my
presence irritates her," he said, as he gave him the letter.
  Stepan Arkadyevich took the letter, looked with incredulous surprise
at the lusterless eyes fixed so immovably on him, and began to read:
  "I see that my presence is irksome to you. Painful as it is to me to
believe it, I see that it is so, and cannot be otherwise. I don't
blame you, and God is my witness that on seeing you at the time of
your illness I resolved with my whole heart to forget all that had
passed between us, and to begin a new life. I do not regret, and shall
never regret, what I have done; but I have desired one thing- your
good, the good of your soul- and now I see I have not attained that.
Tell me yourself what will give you true happiness and peace to your
soul. I put myself entirely in your hands, and trust to your feeling
of what is right."
  Stepan Arkadyevich handed back the letter, and, with the same
surprise, continued looking at his brother-in-law, not knowing what to
say. This silence was so awkward for both of them that Stepan
Arkadyevich's lips began twitching nervously, while he still gazed
without speaking at Karenin's face.
  "That's what I wanted to say to her," said Alexei Alexandrovich,
turning away.
  "Yes, yes..." said Stepan Arkadyevich, not able to answer for the
tears that were choking him. "Yes, yes, I understand you," he
brought out at last.
  "I want to know what she would like," said Alexei Alexandrovich.
  "I am afraid she does not understand her own position. She is not
a judge," said Stepan Arkadyevich, recovering himself. "She is
crushed, simply crushed by your generosity. If she were to read this
letter, she would be incapable of saying anything- she would only hang
her head lower than ever."
  "Yes, but what's to be done in that case? How explain... how find
out her wishes?"
  "If you will allow me to give my opinion, I think that it lies
with you to point out directly the steps you consider necessary to end
the situation."
  "So you consider it must be ended?" Alexei Alexandrovich interrupted
him. "But how?" he added, with a gesture of his hands before his eyes,
not usual with him. "I see no possible way out of it."
  "There is some way of getting out of every situation," said Stepan
Arkadyevich, standing up and becoming more cheerful. "There was a time
when you thought of breaking off... If you are convinced now that
you cannot make each other happy..."
  "Happiness may be variously understood. But suppose that I agree
to everything, that I want nothing: what way is there of getting out
of our situation?"
  "If you care to know my opinion,"- said Stepan Arkadyevich, with the
same smile of softening, almond-oil tenderness with which he had
been talking to Anna. His kindly smile was so winning that Alexei
Alexandrovich, feeling his own weakness and unconsciously swayed by
it, was ready to believe what Stepan Arkadyevich was saying. "She will
never speak out about it. But one thing is possible, one thing she
might desire," he went on; "that is the cessation of your relations,
and all memories associated with them. To my thinking, in your
situation the essential thing is the formation of a new attitude to
one another. And that can only rest on a basis of freedom on both
sides."
  "Divorce," Alexei Alexandrovich interrupted, in a tone of aversion.
  "Yes, I imagine that divorce... Yes, divorce," Stepan Arkadyevich
repeated, reddening. "That is from every point of view the most
rational course for married people who find themselves in the
situation you are in. What can be done if married people find that
life is impossible for them together? That may always happen."
  Alexei Alexandrovich sighed heavily and closed his eyes.
  "There's only one point to be considered: is either of the parties
desirous of forming new ties? If not, it is very simple," said
Stepan Arkadyevich, feeling more and more free from constraint.
  Alexei Alexandrovich, scowling with emotion, muttered something to
himself, and made no answer. All that seemed so simple to Stepan
Arkadyevich, Alexei Alexandrovich had thought over thousands of times.
And, so far from being simple, it all seemed to him utterly
impossible: divorce, the details of which he knew by this time, seemed
to him now out of the question, because the sense of his own dignity
and respect for religion forbade his taking upon himself a
fictitious charge of adultery, and still more, suffering his wife,
pardoned and beloved by him, to be caught in the fact and put to
public shame. Divorce appeared to him impossible also on other,
still more weighty grounds.
  What would become of his son in case of a divorce? To leave him with
his mother was out of the question. The divorced mother would have her
own illegitimate family, in which his status as a stepson, and his
education, would be probably bad. Keep him with him? He knew that
would be an act of vengeance on his part, and that he did not
desire. But, apart from this, what more than all made divorce seem
impossible to Alexei Alexandrovich was that, by consenting to a
divorce, he would be completely ruining Anna. The saying of Darya
Alexandrovna at Moscow, that in deciding on a divorce he was
thinking of himself, and not considering that by this he would be
ruining her irrevocably, had sunk into his heart. And connecting
this saying with his forgiveness of her, with his devotion to the
children, he understood it now in his own way. To consent to a
divorce, to give her her freedom, meant in his thoughts to take from
himself the last tie that bound him to life- the children whom he
loved; and to take from her the last prop that kept her on the path of
right, to thrust her down to her ruin. If she were divorced, he knew
she would join her life to Vronsky's, and their tie would be an
illegitimate and criminal one, since a wife, by the interpretation
of the ecclesiastical law, could not marry while her husband was
living. "She will join him, and in a year or two he will throw her
over, or she will form a new tie," thought Alexei Alexandrovich.
"And I, by agreeing to an unlawful divorce, shall be to blame for
her ruin." He had thought it all over hundreds of times, and was
convinced that a divorce was not at all simple, as Stepan
Arkadyevich had said, but was utterly impossible. He did not believe a
single word Stepan Arkadyevich said to him; to every word he had a
thousand objections to make, but he listened to him, feeling that
his words were the expression of that mighty brutal force which
controlled his life, and to which he would have to submit.
  "The only question is on what terms you agree to give her a divorce.
She does not want anything, does not dare ask you for anything- she
leaves it all to your magnanimity."
  "My God, my God! What for?" thought Alexei Alexandrovich,
remembering the details of divorce proceedings in which the husband
took the blame on himself, and with just the same gesture with which
Vronsky had done it, he hid his face in his hands in shame.
  "You are troubled, I understand that. But if you think it over..."
  "'And unto him that smiteth thee on the one cheek offer also the
other; and him that taketh away thy cloak forbid not to take thy
coat also,'" thought Alexei Alexandrovich.
  "Yes, yes!" he cried in a shrill voice. "I will take the disgrace on
myself, I will give up even my son, but... But wouldn't it be better
to let it alone? Still, you may do as you like...."
  And, turning away so that his brother-in-law could not see him, he
sat down on a chair at the window. There was bitterness, there was
shame in his heart, but with bitterness and shame he felt joy and
emotion at the height of his own meekness.
  Stepan Arkadyevich was touched. He was silent for a space.
  "Alexei Alexandrovich, believe me, she appreciates your
magnanimity," he said. "But it seems it was the will of God," he
added, and as he said it felt how foolish a remark it was, and with
difficulty repressed a smile at his own foolishness.
  Alexei Alexandrovich would have made some reply, but tears stopped
him.
  "This is an unhappy fatality, and one must accept it as such. I
accept the calamity as an accomplished fact, and am doing my best to
help both her and you," said Stepan Arkadyevich.
  When he went out of his brother-in-law's room he was touched, but
that did not prevent him from being glad he had successfully brought
the matter to a conclusion, for he felt certain Alexei Alexandrovich
would not go back on his words. To this satisfaction was added the
fact that an idea had just struck him for a conundrum turning on his
successful achievement- when the affair was over he would put it to
his wife and most intimate friends. He tried this conundrum in two
or three different ways. "But I'll work it out better than that," he
said to himself with a smile.
                             XXIII.

  Vronsky's wound had been a dangerous one, though it did not touch
the heart, and for several days he hovered between life and death. The
first time he was able to speak, Varia, his brother's wife, was
alone in the room.
  "Varia," he said, looking sternly at her, "I shot myself by
accident. And please never speak of it, and tell everyone so. Or
else it's too ridiculous."
  Without answering his words, Varia bent over him, and with a
delighted smile gazed into his face. His eyes were clear, not
feverish; but their expression was stern.
  "Thank God!" she said. "You're not in pain?"
  "A little here," he pointed to his breast.
  "Then let me change your bandages."
  In silence, stiffening his broad jaws, he looked at her while she
bandaged him up. When she had finished he said:
  "I'm not delirious. Please manage that there may be no talk of my
having shot myself on purpose."
  "No one says so. Only I hope you won't shoot yourself by accident
any more," she said, with a questioning smile.
  "I think I won't, but it would have been better..."
  And he smiled gloomily.
  In spite of these words and this smile, which so frightened Varia,
when the inflammation was over and he began to recover, he felt that
he was completely free from one part of his misery. By his action he
had, as it were, washed away the shame and humiliation he had felt
before. He could now think calmly of Alexei Alexandrovich. He
recognized all his magnanimity, but he did not now feel himself
humiliated by it. Besides, he got back again into the beaten track
of his life. He saw the possibility of looking men in the face again
without shame, and he could live in accordance with his own habits.
One thing he could not pluck out of his heart, though he never
ceased struggling with it- the regret, amounting to despair, at having
lost her forever. That, having expiated his sin against the husband,
he was now bound to renounce her, and never in future to stand between
her with her repentance and her husband, he had firmly decided in
his heart; but he could not tear out of his heart his regret at the
loss of her love; he could not erase from his memory those moments
of happiness which he had known with her and had so little prized at
the time, and which haunted him with all their charm.
  Serpukhovskoy had planned his appointment at Tashkend, and Vronsky
agreed to the proposal without the slightest hesitation. But the
nearer the time of departure came, the bitterer was the sacrifice he
was making to what he thought his duty.
  His wound had healed, and he was driving about making preparations
for his departure for Tashkend.
  "To see her once, and then to bury myself, to die," he thought, and,
as he was paying farewell visits, he uttered this thought to Betsy.
Charged with this commission, Betsy had gone to Anna, and brought
him back a negative reply.
  "So much the better," thought Vronsky, when he received the news.
"It was a weakness which would have shattered what strength I have
left."
  Next day Betsy herself came to him in the morning, and announced
that she had heard through Oblonsky, as a positive fact, that Alexei
Alexandrovich had agreed to a divorce, and that therefore Vronsky
could see Anna.
  Without even troubling himself to see Betsy out of his flat,
forgetting all his resolutions, without asking when he could see her
or where her husband was, Vronsky drove straight to the Karenins'.
He ran up the stairs, seeing no one and nothing, and with a rapid
step, almost breaking into a run, he went into her room. And without
considering, without noticing whether there was anyone in the room
or not, he flung his arms round her, and began to cover with kisses
her face, her hands, her neck.
  Anna had been preparing herself for this meeting, had thought what
she would say to him, but she did not succeed in saying anything;
his passion mastered her. She tried to calm him, to calm herself,
but it was too late. His feeling infected her. Her lips trembled so
that for a long while she could say nothing.
  "Yes, you have conquered me, and I am yours," she said at last,
pressing his hands to her bosom.
  "So it had to be," he said. "So long as we live, it must be so. I
know it now."
  "That's true," she said, getting whiter and whiter, and embracing
his head. "Still, there is something terrible in it after all that has
happened."
  "It will all pass, it will all pass; we shall be so happy. Our love,
if it only could be stronger, will be strengthened by there being
something terrible in it," he said, lifting his head and showing his
strong teeth in a smile.
  And she could not but respond with a smile- not to his words, but to
the love in his eyes. She took his hand and stroked her chilled cheeks
and cropped head with it.
  "I don't know you with this short hair. You've grown so pretty. A
boy. But how pale you are!"
  "Yes, I'm very weak," she said, smiling. And her lips began
trembling again.
  "We'll go to Italy; you will get strong," he said.
  "Can it be possible we could be like husband and wife, alone, our
own family?" she said, looking close into his eyes.
  "It only seems strange to me that it can ever have been otherwise."
  "Stiva says that he has agreed to everything, but I can't accept his
magnanimity," she said, looking dreamily past Vronsky's face. "I don't
want a divorce; it's all the same to me now. Only I don't know what he
will decide about Seriozha."
  He could not conceive how at this moment of their meeting she
could remember and think of her son, of divorce. What did it all
matter?
  "Don't speak of that, don't think of it," he said, turning her
hand in his, and trying to draw her attention to him; but still she
did not look at him.
  "Oh, why didn't I die! It would have been better," she said, and,
without sobbing, tears flowed down both her cheeks; but she tried to
smile, so as not to wound him.
  To decline the flattering and dangerous appointment at Tashkend
would have been, Vronsky had till then considered, disgraceful and
impossible. But now, without an instant's consideration, he declined
it, and observing dissatisfaction in the upper quarters at this
step, he immediately retired from the army.
  A month later Alexei Alexandrovich was left alone with his son in
his house at Peterburg, while Anna had gone abroad with Vronsky,
without having obtained a divorce, and having absolutely declined
all idea of one.
                         PART FIVE

                             I.

  Princess Shcherbatskaia considered that it was out of the question
for the wedding to take place before Lent, just five weeks off,
since not half the trousseau could possibly be ready by that time. But
she could not but agree with Levin that to fix it for after Lent would
be putting it off too late, as an old aunt of Prince Shcherbatsky's
was seriously ill and might die, and then the mourning would delay the
wedding still longer. And therefore, deciding to divide the
trousseau into two parts- a larger and a smaller trousseau- the
Princess consented to have the wedding before Lent. She determined
that she would get the smaller part of the trousseau all ready now,
and the larger part should be sent on later, and she was much vexed
with Levin because he was incapable of giving her a serious answer
to the question whether he agreed to this arrangement or not. The
arrangement was the more suitable as, immediately after the wedding,
the newly married couple were to go to the country, where the
belongings of the larger trousseau would not be wanted.
  Levin still continued in the same delirious condition, in which it
seemed to him that he and his happiness constituted the chief and sole
aim of all existence, and that he need not now think or care about
anything, that everything was being done and would be done for him
by others. He had not even plans and aims for the future, he left
its arrangement to others, knowing that everything would be
delightful. His brother, Sergei Ivanovich, and Stepan Arkadyevich, and
the Princess, guided him in doing what he had to do. All he did was to
agree entirely with everything suggested to him. His brother raised
money for him, the Princess advised him to leave Moscow after the
wedding. Stepan Arkadyevich advised him to go abroad. He agreed to
everything. "Do what you choose, if it amuses you, I'm happy, and my
happiness can be no greater and no less because of anything you do,"
he thought. When he told Kitty of Stepan Arkadyevich's advice that
they should go abroad, he was much surprised that she did not agree to
this, and had some definite requirements of her own in regard to their
future. She knew Levin had work he loved in the country. She did
not, as he saw, understand this work- she did not even care to
understand it. But that did not prevent her from regarding it as a
matter of great importance. And therefore she knew their home would be
in the country, and she wanted to go not abroad where she was not
going to live, but to the place where their home would be. This
definitely expressed purpose astonished Levin. But since he did not
care either way, he immediately asked Stepan Arkadyevich, as though it
were his duty, to go down to the country and to arrange everything
there to the best of his ability, with that taste of which he had so
much.
  "But, I say," Stepan Arkadyevich said to him one day after he had
come back from the country, where he had got everything ready for
the young people's arrival, "have you a certificate of having been
at confession?"
  "No. But what of it?"
  "You can't be married without it."
  "My, my, my!" cried Levin. "Why, I believe it's nine years since
I've taken the sacrament! I never thought of it."
  "You're a pretty fellow!" said Stepan Arkadyevich laughing, "and you
call me a Nihilist! But this won't do, you know. You must take the
sacrament."
  "When? There are four days left now."
  Stepan Arkadyevich arranged this also, and Levin had to prepare
himself for the sacrament. To Levin, as to any unbeliever who respects
the beliefs of others, it was exceedingly disagreeable to be present
at and to take part in church ceremonies. At this moment, in his
present softened state of feeling, sensitive to everything, this
inevitable act of hypocrisy was not merely painful to Levin, it seemed
to him utterly impossible. Now, in the heyday of his highest glory,
his fullest flower, he would have to be a liar or a blasphemer. He
felt incapable of being either. But though he repeatedly plied
Stepan Arkadyevich with questions as to the possibility of obtaining a
certificate without actually communicating, Stepan Arkadyevich
maintained that it was out of the question.
  "Besides, what is it to you- two days? And he's an awfully fine,
clever old fellow. He'll pull the tooth out for you so gently you
won't notice it."
  Standing at the first mass, Levin attempted to revive in himself his
youthful recollections of the intense religious emotion he had
passed through between the ages of sixteen and seventeen. But he was
at once convinced that it was utterly impossible to him. He
attempted to look at it all as an empty custom, having no sort of
meaning, like the custom of paying calls; but he felt that he could
not do that either. Levin found himself, like the majority of his
contemporaries, in the vaguest position in regard to religion. Believe
he could not, and at the same time he had no firm conviction that it
was all wrong. And consequently, not being able to believe in the
significance of what he was doing, nor to regard it with
indifference as an empty formality, during the whole period of
preparing for the sacrament he was conscious of a feeling of
discomfort and shame at doing what he did not himself understand,
and what, as an inner voice told him, was therefore false and wrong.
  During the service he would first listen to the prayers, trying to
attach some meaning to them not discordant with his own views; then
feeling that he could not understand and must condemn them, he tried
not to listen to them, but to attend to the thoughts, observations,
and memories which floated through his brain with extreme vividness
during this idle time of standing in church.
  He had stood through the mass, the evening service, and the midnight
service, and the next day he got up earlier than usual, and, without
having tea, went at eight o'clock in the morning to the church for the
morning service and the confession.
  There was no one in church but a beggar soldier, two old women,
and the churchmen. A young deacon, whose long back showed in two
distinct halves through his thin undercassock, met him, and, at once
going to a little table at the wall, read the exhortations. During the
reading, especially at the frequent and rapid repetition of the same
words, "Lord, have mercy on us!" which sounded like "mercynuslor!"
Levin felt that his thought was shut and sealed up, and that it must
not be touched or stirred now, or else confusion would be the
result; and so standing behind the deacon he went on thinking of his
own affairs, neither listening nor examining what was said. "It's
wonderful what expression there is in her hand," he thought,
remembering how they had been sitting the day before at a corner
table. They had nothing to talk about, as was almost always the case
at this time, and laying her hand on the table she kept opening and
shutting it, and laughed herself as she watched her action. He
remembered how he had kissed her hand and then had examined the
lines on the pink palm. "Another 'mercynuslor!'" thought Levin,
crossing himself, bowing, and looking at the supple spring of the
deacon's back bowing before him. "She took my hand then and examined
the lines. 'You've got a splendid hand,' she said." And he looked at
his own hand and the short hand of the deacon. "Yes, now it will
soon be over," he thought. "No, it seems to be starting up again,"
he thought, listening to the prayers. "No, it's just ending: there
he is bowing down to the ground. That's always at the end."
  The deacon's hand in a plush cuff unobtrusively accepted a
three-rouble note, and the deacon said he would put Levin's name
down in the register, and, his new boots creaking jauntily over the
flagstones of the empty church, he went to the altar. A moment later
he peeped out thence and beckoned to Levin. Thought, till then
locked up, began to stir in Levin's head, but he made haste to drive
it away. "It will come right somehow," he thought, and went toward the
ambo. He went up the steps, and turning to the right, saw the
priest. The priest, a little ancient with a scanty grizzled beard
and weary, good-natured eyes, was standing at the lectern, turning
over the pages of a missal. With a slight bow to Levin he began
immediately reading prayers in an accustomed voice. When he had
finished them he bowed down to the ground and turned, facing Levin.
  "Christ is present here unseen, receiving your confession," he said,
pointing to the crucifix. "Do you believe in all the doctrines of
the Holy Apostolic Church?" the priest went on, turning his eyes
away from Levin's face and folding his hands under his stole.
  "I have doubted- I doubt everything," said Levin in a voice that
jarred on himself, and he ceased speaking.
  The priest waited a few seconds to see if he would not say more, and
closing his eyes he said quickly, with a broad, Vladimirsky accent:
  "Doubt is natural to the weakness of mankind, but we must pray
that God in His mercy will strengthen us. What are your special sins?"
he added, without the slightest interval, as though anxious not to
waste time.
  "My chief sin is doubt. I have doubts of everything, and for the
most part I am in doubt."
  "Doubt is natural to the weakness of mankind," the priest repeated
the same words. "What do you doubt about principally?"
  "I doubt everything. I sometimes even have doubts of the existence
of God," Levin could not help saying, and he was horrified at the
impropriety of what he was saying. But Levin's words did not, it
seemed, make much impression on the priest.
  "What sort of doubt can there be of the existence of God?" he said
hurriedly, with a barely perceptible smile.
  Levin did not speak.
  "What doubt can you have of the Creator when you behold His
creation?" the priest went on in the rapid customary recitative.
"Who has decked the heavenly firmament with its lights? Who has
clothed the earth in its beauty? How explain it without the
Creator?" he said, looking inquiringly at Levin.
  Levin felt that it would be improper to enter upon a metaphysical
discussion with the priest, and so he said in reply merely what was
a direct answer to the question.
  "I don't know," he said.
  "You don't know! Then how can you doubt that God created all?" the
priest said, with good-humored perplexity.
  "I don't understand it at all," said Levin, blushing, and feeling
that his words were stupid, and that they could not be anything but
stupid in such a position.
  "Pray to God and beseech Him. Even the holy fathers had doubts,
and prayed to God to strengthen their faith. The devil has great
power, and we must resist him. Pray to God, beseech Him. Pray to God,"
he repeated hurriedly.
  The priest paused for some time, as though meditating.
  "You, I hear, are about to marry the daughter of my parishioner
and son in the spirit, Prince Shcherbatsky?" he resumed, with a smile.
"An excellent young lady."
  "Yes," answered Levin, blushing for the priest. "What does he want
to ask me about this at confession for?" he thought.
  And, as though answering his thought, the priest said to him:
  "You are about to enter into holy matrimony, and God may bless you
with offspring. Are you?- Well, what sort of bringing-up can you
give your babes if you do not overcome the temptation of the devil,
enticing you to infidelity?" he said, with gentle reproachfulness. "If
you love your child as a good father, you will not desire only wealth,
luxury, honor for your infant; you will be anxious for his
salvation, his spiritual enlightenment with the light of truth. Eh?
What answer will you make him when the innocent babe asks you:
'Papa! Who made all that enchants me in this world- the earth, the
waters, the sun, the flowers, the grass?' Can you say to him: 'I don't
know?' You cannot but know, since the Lord God in His infinite mercy
has revealed it to us. Or your child will ask you: 'What awaits me
in the life beyond the grave?' What will you say to him when you
know nothing? How will you answer him? Will you leave him to the
allurements of the world and the devil? That's not right," he said,
and he stopped, putting his head on one side and looking at Levin with
his kindly, gentle eyes.
  Levin made no answer this time, not because he did not want to enter
upon a discussion with the priest, but because no one had ever asked
him such questions- and when his babes did ask him those questions, it
would be time enough to think about answering them.
  "You are entering upon a time of life," pursued the priest, "when
you must choose your path and keep to it. Pray to God that He may in
His mercy aid you and have mercy on you!" he concluded. "Our Lord
and God, Jesus Christ, in the abundance and riches of His
loving-kindness, forgives this child..." and, finishing the prayer
of absolution, the priest blessed him and dismissed him.
  On getting home that day, Levin had a delightful sense of relief
at the awkward position being over and having been got through without
his having to tell a lie. Apart from this, there remained a vague
memory that what the kind, fine old fellow had said had not been at
all as stupid as he had fancied at first, and that there was something
in it that must be cleared up.
  "Of course, not now," thought Levin, "but at some later day."
Levin felt more than ever now that there was something not clear and
not clean in his soul, and that, in regard to religion, he was in
the same position which he perceived so clearly and disliked in
others, and for which he blamed his friend Sviiazhsky.
  Levin spent that evening with his betrothed at Dolly's, and was in
very high spirits. To explain to Stepan Arkadyevich the state of
excitement in which he found himself, he said that he was happy,
like a dog being trained to jump through a hoop, who, having at last
caught the idea, and done what was required of him, whines and wags
its tail, and jumps up to the table and the window sills in its
delight.
                             II.

  On the day of the wedding, according to the Russian custom (the
Princess and Darya Alexandrovna insisted on strictly keeping all the
customs), Levin did not see his betrothed, and dined at his hotel with
three bachelor friends, casually brought together at his rooms.
These were Sergei Ivanovich, Katavassov, a university friend, now
professor of natural science, whom Levin had met in the street and
insisted on taking home with him, and Chirikov, his best man, a Moscow
justice of the peace, Levin's companion in his bear hunts. The
dinner was a very merry one: Sergei Ivanovich was in his happiest
mood, and was much amused by Katavassov's originality. Katavassov,
feeling his originality was appreciated and understood, made the
most of it. Chirikov always gave a lively and good-humored support
to conversation of any sort.
  "See, now," said Katavassov, drawling his words from a habit
acquired in the lecture room, "what a capable fellow was our friend
Konstantin Dmitrievich. I'm speaking of absent company- he doesn't
exist for us now. At the time he left the university he was fond of
science, took an interest in humanity; now one-half of his abilities
is devoted to deceiving himself, and the other to justifying the
deceit."
  "A more determined enemy of matrimony than you I never saw," said
Sergei Ivanovich.
  "Oh, no, I'm not an enemy of matrimony. I'm in favor of division
of labor. People who can do nothing else ought to rear people, while
the rest work for their happiness and enlightenment. That's how I look
at it. To muddle up two trades there are too many amateurs; I'm not
one of their number."
  "How happy I shall be when I hear that you're in love!" said
Levin. "Please invite me to the wedding."
  "I'm in love now."
  "Yes, with a cuttlefish! You know," Levin turned to his brother,
"Mikhail Semionovich is writing a work on the digestive organs of
the..."
  "Now, make a muddle of it! It doesn't matter what about. And the
fact is, I certainly do love cuttlefish."
  "But that's no hindrance to your loving your wife."
  "The cuttlefish is no hindrance. The wife is the hindrance."
  "Why so?"
  "Oh, you'll see! You care about farming, hunting- well, you'll
see!..."
  "Arkhip was here today; he said there were no end of elk in Prudnoe,
and two bears," said Chirikov.
  "Well, you must go and get them without me."
  "Ah, that's the truth," said Sergei Ivanovich. "And you may say
good-by to bear hunting for the future- your wife won't allow it!"
  Levin smiled. The picture of his wife not letting him go was so
pleasant that he was ready to renounce forever the delights of looking
upon bears.
  "Still, it's a pity they should get those two bears without you.
Do you remember last time at Khapilovo? And now it would be a
delightful hunt!" said Chirikov.
  Levin had not the heart to disillusion him of the notion that
there could be something delightful apart from her, and so said
nothing.
  "There's some sense in this custom of saying good-by to bachelor
life," said Sergei Ivanovich. "However happy you may be, you must
regret your freedom."
  "And confess there is a feeling that you want to jump out of the
window, like Gogol's bridegroom?"
  "Of course there is, but he won't confess," said Katavassov, and
he broke into loud laughter.
  "Oh, well, the window's open.... Let's start off this instant to
Tver! There's a big she-bear; one can go right up to the lair.
Seriously, let's go by the five o'clock! And here let them do what
they like," said Chirikov smiling.
  "Well, now, on my honor," said Levin smiling, "I can't find in my
heart that feeling of regret for my freedom."
  "Yes, there's such a chaos in your heart just now that you can't
find anything there," said Katavassov. "Wait a bit, when you set it to
rights a little, you'll find it!"
  "No; if so, I should have felt a little, apart from my feeling"
(he could not say "love" before them) "and happiness, a certain regret
at losing my freedom.... On the contrary, I am glad at the very loss
of my freedom."
  "Awful! It's a hopeless case!" said Katavassov. "Well, let's drink
to his recovery, or wish that a hundredth part of his dreams may be
realized- and that would be happiness such as never has been seen on
earth!"
  Soon after dinner the guests went away to dress in time for the
wedding.
  When he was left alone, and recalled the conversation of these
bachelor friends, Levin asked himself: Had he in his heart that regret
for his freedom of which they had spoken? He smiled at the question.
"Freedom! What is freedom for? Happiness is only in loving and wishing
her wishes, thinking her thoughts; that is to say, not freedom at all-
that's happiness!"
  "But do I know her thoughts, her wishes, her feelings?" some voice
suddenly whispered to him. The smile died away from his face, and he
grew thoughtful. And suddenly a strange feeling came upon him. There
came over him a dread and doubt- doubt of everything.
  "What if she does not love me? What if she's marrying me simply to
be married? What if she doesn't see herself what she's doing?" he
asked himself. "She may come to her senses, and only when she is being
married realize that she does not and cannot love me." And strange,
most evil thoughts of her began to come to him. He was jealous of
Vronsky, as he had been a year ago, as though the evening he had
seen her with Vronsky had been yesterday. He suspected she had not
told him everything.
  He jumped up quickly. "No, this can't go on!" he said to himself
in despair. "I'll go to her; I'll ask her; I'll say for the last time:
We are free, and hadn't we better stay so? Anything's better than
endless misery, disgrace, unfaithfulness!" With despair in his heart
and bitter anger against all men, against himself, against her, he
went out of the hotel and drove to her house.
  He found her in one of the rear rooms. She was sitting on a chest
and making some arrangements with her maid, sorting over heaps of
dresses of different colors, spread on the backs of chairs and on
the floor.
  "Ah!" she cried, seeing him, and beaming with delight. "Kostia!
Konstantin Dmitrievich!" (These latter days she used these names
almost alternately.) "I didn't expect you! I'm going through my
girlish wardrobe to see what's for whom...."
  "Oh! That's very lovely!" he said gloomily, looking at the maid.
  "You can go, Duniasha, I'll call you presently," said Kitty.
"Kostia, what's the matter?" she asked, definitely adopting this
familiar name as soon as the maid had gone out. She noticed his
strange face, agitated and gloomy, and a panic came over her.
  "Kitty! I'm in torture. I can't be in torture alone," he said with
despair in his voice, standing before her and looking imploringly into
her eyes. He saw already from her loving, truthful face, that
nothing could come of what he had meant to say, but yet he wanted
her to reassure him herself. "I've come to say that there's still
time. This can all be stopped and set right."
  "What? I don't understand. What is the matter?"
  "What I have said a thousand times over, and can't help
thinking... that I'm not worthy of you. You couldn't consent to
marry me. Think a little. You've made a mistake. Think it over
thoroughly. You can't love me... if... Better say so," he said,
without looking at her. "I shall be wretched. Let people say what they
like; anything's better than misery.... Far better now while there's
still time...."
  "I don't understand," she answered, panic-stricken; "you mean you
want to give it up... that you don't want it?"
  "Yes- if you don't love me."
  "You're out of your mind!" she cried, turning crimson with vexation.
But his face was so piteous that she restrained her vexation, and
flinging some clothes off an armchair, she sat down beside him.
"What are you thinking? Tell me all."
  "I am thinking you can't love me. What can you love me for?"
  "My God! What can I do?..." she said, and burst into tears.
  "Oh! What have I done?" he cried, and kneeling before her, he fell
to kissing her hands.
  When the old Princess came into the room five minutes later, she
found them completely reconciled. Kitty had not simply assured him
that she loved him, but had gone so far- in answer to his question,
what she loved him for- as to explain what for. She told him that
she loved him because she understood him completely, because she
knew what he would like, and because everything he liked was good. And
this seemed to him perfectly clear. When the Princess came to them,
they were sitting side by side on the chest, sorting the dresses and
disputing over Kitty's wanting to give Duniasha the brown dress she
had been wearing when Levin proposed to her, while he insisted that
that dress must never be given away, but that Duniasha should have the
blue one.
  "How is it you don't see? She's a brunette, and it won't suit
her.... I've worked it all out."
  Hearing why he had come, the Princess was half-humorously,
half-seriously angry with him, and sent him home to dress and not to
hinder Kitty's hairdressing, as Charles the coiffeur was just coming.
  "As it is, she's been eating nothing lately and is losing her looks,
and then you must come and upset her with your nonsense," she said
to him. "Get along with you, my dear!"
  Levin, guilty and shamefaced, but pacified, went back to his
hotel. His brother, Darya Alexandrovna, and Stepan Arkadyevich, all in
full dress, were waiting for him to bless him with an icon. There
was no time to lose. Darya Alexandrovna had to drive home again to
fetch her curled and pomaded son, who was to carry the icon in the
bride's carriage. Then a carriage had to be sent for the best man, and
another, that would take Sergei Ivanovich away, would have to be
sent back.... Altogether there were a great many most complicated
matters to be considered and arranged. One thing was unmistakable-
that there must be no delay, as it was already half-past six.
  Nothing special happened at the ceremony of benediction with the
icon. Stepan Arkadyevich stood in a comically solemn pose beside his
wife, took the icon, and, telling Levin to bow down to the ground,
he blessed him with his kindly, ironical smile, and kissed him three
times; Darya Alexandrovna did the same, and immediately was in a hurry
to get off, and again plunged into the intricate question of the due
order of the various carriages.
  "Come, I'll tell you how we'll manage: you drive in our carriage
to fetch him, and Sergei Ivanovich, if he'll be so good, will drive
there and then send his carriage."
  "Of course; I shall be delighted."
  "We'll come on directly with him. Are your things sent off?" asked
Stepan Arkadyevich.
  "Yes," answered Levin, and he told Kouzma to lay out his clothes for
him to dress.
                             III.

  A crowd of people, principally women, was thronging round the church
lighted up for the wedding. Those who had not succeeded in getting
into the main entrance were crowding about the windows, pushing,
wrangling, and peeping through the gratings.
  More than twenty carriages had already been drawn up in ranks
along the street by the police. A police officer, regardless of the
frost, stood at the entrance, gorgeous in his uniform. More
carriages were continually driving up, and ladies wearing flowers
and carrying their trains, and men taking off their kepis or black
hats, kept walking into the church. Inside the church both lusters
were already lighted, and all the candles before the icons. The golden
nimbus on the red ground of the ikonostasis, and the gilt relief on
the icons and the silver of the lusters and candlesticks, and the
floor-flags, and the rugs, and the banners above in the choir, and the
steps of the ambo, and the old blackened books, and the cassocks and
surplices- all were flooded with light. On the right side of the
warm church, in the crowd of evening dresses and white ties, of
uniforms, and of silk, velvet, satin, hair and flowers, of bare
shoulders and arms and long gloves, there was discreet but lively
conversation that echoed strangely in the high cupola. Every time
there was heard the creak of the opened door the conversation in the
crowd died away, and everybody looked round expecting to see the bride
and bridegroom come in. But the door had opened more than ten times,
and each time it was either a belated guest or guests, who joined
the circle of the invited on the right, or some spectator, who had
eluded or softened the police officer, and went to join the crowd of
outsiders on the left. Both the guests and the outside public had by
now passed through all the phases of anticipation.
  At first they imagined that the bride and bridegroom would arrive
immediately, and attached no importance at all to their being late.
Then they began to look more and more often toward the door, and to
talk of whether anything could have happened. Then the long delay
began to be positively discomforting, and relations and guests tried
to look as if they were not thinking of the bridegroom at all, but
were engrossed in conversation.
  The protodeacon, as though to remind them of the value of his
time, coughed impatiently, making the windowpanes rattle in their
frames. In the choir the bored choristers could be heard trying
their voices and blowing their noses. The priest was continually
sending first the church clerk and then the deacon to find out whether
the bridegroom had not come, more and more often he went himself, in a
lilac vestment and an embroidered sash, to the side door, expecting to
see the bridegroom. At last one of the ladies, glancing at her
watch, said, "It really is strange, though!" and all the guests became
uneasy and began loudly expressing their wonder and dissatisfaction.
One of the bridegroom's best men went to find out what had happened.
Kitty meanwhile had long ago been quite ready, and, in her white dress
and long veil and wreath of orange blossoms, was standing in the
drawing room of the Shcherbatskys' house with her sister, Madame
Lvova, who was her bridal mother. She was looking out of the window,
and had been for over half an hour anxiously expecting to hear from
her best man that her bridegroom was at the church.
  Levin meanwhile, in his trousers, but without his coat and
waistcoat, was walking to and fro in his room at the hotel,
continually putting his head out of door and looking up and down the
corridor. But in the corridor there was no sign of the person he was
looking for and he came back in despair, and waving his hands
addressed Stepan Arkadyevich, who was smoking serenely.
  "Was ever a man in such a fearful fool's position?" he said.
  "Yes, it is stupid," Stepan Arkadyevich assented, smiling
soothingly. "But don't worry, it'll be brought directly."
  "No, what is to be done!" said Levin, with smothered fury. "And
these fool open waistcoats! Out of the question!" he said, looking
at the crumpled front of his shirt. "And what if the things have
been taken on to the railway station!" he roared in desperation.
  "Then you must put on mine."
  "I ought to have done so long ago, if at all."
  "It's not well to look ridiculous.... Wait a bit! It will come
round."
  The point was that when Levin asked for his evening suit, Kouzma,
his old servant, had brought him the coat, waistcoat, and everything
that was wanted.
  "But the shirt!" cried Levin.
  "You've got a shirt on," Kouzma answered, with a placid smile.
  Kouzma had not thought of leaving out a clean shirt, and on
receiving instructions to pack up everything and send it round to
the Shcherbatskys' house, from which the young people were to set
out the same evening, he had done so, packing everything but the dress
suit. The shirt worn since the morning was crumpled and out of the
question with the fashionable open waistcoat. It was a long way to
send to the Shcherbatskys'. They sent out to buy a shirt. The
servant came back; everything was shut up- it was Sunday. They sent to
Stepan Arkadyevich's and brought a shirt- it was impossibly wide and
short. They sent finally to the Shcherbatskys' to unpack the things.
The bridegroom was expected at the church while he was pacing up and
down his room like a wild beast in a cage, peeping out into the
corridor, and with horror and despair recalling what absurd things
he had said to Kitty and what she might be thinking now.
  At last the guilty Kouzma flew panting into the room with the shirt.
  "Only just in time. They were just lifting it into the van," said
Kouzma.
  Three minutes later Levin ran full speed into the corridor,
without looking at his watch for fear of aggravating his sufferings.
  "You won't help matters like that," said Stepan Arkadyevich with a
smile, hurrying with more deliberation after him. "It will come round,
it will come round- I tell you."
                             IV.

  "They've come!" "Here he is!" "Which one?" "Rather young, eh?" "Why,
my dear soul, she looks more dead than alive!" were the comments in
the crowd, when Levin, meeting his bride in the entrance, walked
with her into the church.
  Stepan Arkadyevich told his wife the cause of the delay, and the
guests were whispering it with smiles to one another. Levin saw
nothing and no one; he did not take his eyes off his bride.
  Everyone said she had lost her looks dreadfully of late, and was not
nearly as pretty on her wedding day as usual; but Levin did not
think so. He looked at her hair done up high, with the long white veil
and white flowers and the high, scalloped de Medici collar, that in
such a maidenly fashion hid her long neck at the sides and only showed
it in front, and her strikingly slender figure, and it seemed to him
that she looked better than ever- not because these flowers, this
veil, this gown from Paris added anything to her beauty; but
because, in spite of the elaborate sumptuousness of her attire, the
expression of her sweet face, of her eyes, of her lips was still her
own characteristic expression of guileless truthfulness.
  "I was beginning to think you meant to run away," she said, and
smiled to him.
  What happened to me is so stupid I'm ashamed to speak of it!" he
said, reddening, and he was obliged to turn to Sergei Ivanovich, who
came up to him.
  "This is a pretty story of yours about the shirt!" said Sergei
Ivanovich, shaking his head and smiling.
  "Yes, yes!" answered Levin, without an idea of what they were
talking about.
  "Now, Kostia, you have to decide," said Stepan Arkadyevich with an
air of mock dismay, "a weighty question. You are at this moment just
in the humor to appreciate all its gravity. They ask me, are they to
light the candles that have been lighted before or candles that have
never been lighted? It's a matter of ten roubles," he added,
relaxing his lips into a smile. "I have decided, but I was afraid
you might not agree."
  Levin saw it was a joke, but he could not smile.
  "Well, how's it to be then- unused or used candles?- that is the
question."
  "Yes, yes, unused ones."
  "Oh, I'm very glad. The question's decided!" said Stepan
Arkadyevich, smiling. "How silly men become, though, in this
situation," he said to Chirikov, when Levin, after looking absently at
him, had moved back to his bride.
  "Kitty, mind you're the first to step on the carpet," said
Countess Nordstone, coming up. "You're a fine person!" she said to
Levin.
  "Aren't you frightened, eh?" said Marya Dmitrievna, an old aunt.
  "Are you cold? You're pale. Stop a minute, stoop down," said Kitty's
sister, Madame Lvova, and with her plump, pretty hands she smilingly
set straight the flowers on her head.
  Dolly came up, tried to say something, but could not speak, cried,
and then laughed naturally.
  Kitty looked at all of them with the same absent eyes as Levin.
  Meanwhile the officiating clergy had got into their vestments, and
the priest and deacon came out to the lectern, which stood in the
porch of the church. The priest turned to Levin saying something.
Levin did not hear what the priest said.
  "Take the bride's hand and lead her up," the best man said to Levin.
  It was a long while before Levin could make out what was expected of
him. For a long time they tried to set him right and made him begin
again- because he kept taking Kitty by the wrong arm or with the wrong
arm- till he understood at last that what he had to do was, without
changing his position, to take her right hand in his right hand.
When at last he had taken the bride's hand in the correct way, the
priest walked a few paces in front of them and stopped at the lectern.
The crowd of friends and relations moved after them, with a buzz of
talk and a rustle of trains. Someone stooped down and straightened out
the bride's train. The church became so still that the drops of wax
could be heard falling from the candles.
  The little old priest in his calotte, with his long silvery-gray
locks of hair parted behind his ears, was fumbling with something at
the lectern, putting out his little old hands from under the heavy
silver vestment with the gold cross on the back of it.
  Stepan Arkadyevich approached him cautiously, whispered something,
and, giving a wink at Levin, walked back again.
  The priest lighted two candles, wreathed with flowers, and holding
them sideways so that the wax dropped slowly from them he turned,
facing the bridal pair. The priest was the same old man who had
confessed Levin. He looked with weary and melancholy eyes at the bride
and bridegroom, sighed, and, putting his right hand out from under his
vestment, blessed the bridegroom with it, and also, with a shade of
solicitous tenderness, laid his crossed fingers on the bowed head of
Kitty. Then he gave them the candles, and, taking the censer, moved
slowly away from them.
  "Can it be true?" thought Levin, and he looked round at his bride.
Looking down at her he saw her face in profile, and from the
scarcely perceptible quiver of her lips and eyelashes he knew she
was aware of his eyes upon her. She did not look round, but the high
scalloped collar, that reached her little pink ear, trembled
faintly. He saw that a sigh was held back in her throat, and the
little hand in the long glove shook as it held the candle.
  All the fuss of the shirt, of being late, all the talk of friends
and relations, their annoyance, his ludicrous position- all suddenly
passed away and he was filled with joy and dread.
  The handsome, stately protodeacon wearing a silver robe, and his
curly locks standing out at each side of his head, stepped smartly
forward, and lifting his stole on two fingers, stood opposite the
priest.
  "Blessed be the name of the Lord," the solemn syllables rang out
slowly one after another, setting the air quivering with waves of
sound.
  "Blessed is the name of our God, from the beginning, as now, and
forever and aye," the little old priest answered in a submissive,
piping voice, still fingering something at the lectern. And the full
chorus of the unseen choir rose up, filling the whole church, from the
windows to the vaulted roof, with broad waves of melody. It grew
stronger, rested for an instant, and slowly died away.
  They prayed, as they always do, for peace from on high and for
salvation, for the Holy Synod, and for the Czar; they prayed, too, for
the servants of God, Konstantin and Ekaterina, now plighting their
troth.
  "Vouchsafe to them love made perfect, peace, and help, O Lord, we
beseech Thee," the whole church seemed to breathe with the voice of
the protodeacon.
  Levin heard the words, and they impressed him. "How did they guess
that it is help, just help that one wants?" he thought, recalling
all his fears and doubts of late. "What do I know? what can I do in
this fearful business," he thought, "without help? Yes, it is help I
want now."
  When the deacon had finished the liturgical prayer, the priest
turned to the bridal pair with his book: "Eternal God, who joinest
together in love them that were separate," he read in a gentle, piping
voice, "who hast ordained the union of holy wedlock that cannot be set
asunder, Thou who didst bless Isaac and Rebecca and their descendants,
according to Thy Holy Covenant, bless Thou Thy servants, Konstantin
and Ekaterina, leading them in the path of all good works. For
gracious and merciful art Thou, our Lord, and glory be to Thee, the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, now and forever and aye."-
"Amen!" the unseen choir sent rolling again through the air.
  "'Joinest together in love them that were separate.' What deep
meaning in those words, and how they correspond with what one feels at
this moment," thought Levin. "Is she feeling the same as I?"
  And, looking round, he met her eyes. And from their expression he
concluded that she was understanding it just as he was. But this was a
mistake; she almost completely missed the meaning of the words of
the service; she had not heard them, in fact. She could not listen
to them and take them in, so strong was the one feeling that filled
her breast and grew stronger and stronger. That feeling was joy at the
completion of the process that for the last month and a half had
been going on in her soul, and had during those six weeks been a joy
and a torture to her. On the day when in the drawing room of the house
in the Arbat street she had gone up to him in her brown dress, and had
given herself to him without a word- on that day, at that hour,
there took place in her heart a complete severance from all her old
life, and a quite different, new, utterly strange life had begun for
her, while the old life was actually going on as before. Those six
weeks had for her been a time of the utmost bliss and the utmost
misery. All her life, all her desires and hopes were concentrated on
this one man, still uncomprehended by her, to whom she was bound by
a feeling of alternate attraction and repulsion, even less
comprehended than the man himself, and all the while she was going
on living in the outward conditions of her old life. Living the old
life, she was horrified at herself, at her utter insurmountable
callousness to all her own past, to things, to habits, to the people
she had loved, who loved her- to her mother, who was wounded by her
indifference, to her kind, tender father, till then dearer than all
the world. At one moment she was horrified at this indifference, at
another she rejoiced at what had brought her to this indifference. She
could not frame a thought, nor a wish, apart from life with this
man; but this new life was not yet, and she could not even picture
it clearly to herself. There was only anticipation, the dread and
joy of the new and the unknown. And now behold anticipation and
uncertainty and remorse at the abandonment of the old life- all this
was ending, and the new was beginning. This new life could not but
have terrors for her by its obscurity; but, terrible or not, the
change had been wrought six weeks before in her soul, and this was
merely the final sanction of what had long been completed in her
heart.
  Turning again to the lectern, the priest with some difficulty took
Kitty's little ring, and, asking Levin for his hand, put it on the
first joint of his finger. "The servant of God, Konstantin, plights
his troth to the servant of God, Ekaterina." And putting his big
ring on Kitty's touchingly weak, pink tiny finger, the priest said the
same thing.
  And the bridal pair tried several times to understand what they
had to do, and each time made some mistake and were corrected by the
priest in a whisper. At last, having duly performed the ceremony,
having made with the rings the sign of the cross over them, the priest
handed Kitty the big ring, and Levin the little one. Again they were
puzzled, and passed the rings from hand to hand, still without doing
what was expected.
  Dolly, Chirikov, and Stepan Arkadyevich stepped forward to set
them right. There was an interval of hesitation, whispering, and
smiles; but the expression of solemn emotion on the faces of the
betrothed pair did not change: on the contrary, in their perplexity
over their hands they looked more grave and deeply moved than
before, and the smile with which Stepan Arkadyevich whispered to
them that now they would each put on their own ring died away on his
lips. He had a feeling that any smile would jar on them.
  "Thou who didst from the beginning create male and female," the
priest read after the exchange of rings, "from Thee woman was given to
man to be a helpmeet to him, and for the procreation of children. O
Lord, our God, who hast poured down the blessings of Thy Truth
according to Thy Holy Covenant upon Thy chosen servants, our
fathers, from generation to generation, bless Thy servants
Konstantin and Ekaterina, and make their troth fast in faith, and
union of hearts, and in truth, and in love...."
  Levin felt more and more that all his ideas of marriage, all his
dreams of how he would order his life, were mere childishness, and
that it was something he had not understood hitherto, and now
understood less than ever, though it was being performed upon him. The
lump in his throat rose higher and higher; tears that would not be
checked came into his eyes.
                             V.

  In the church there was all Moscow, all the friends and relations;
and during the ceremony of plighting troth, in the brilliantly lighted
church, there was an incessant flow of discreetly subdued talk in
the circle of gaily dressed women and girls, and men in white ties,
evening dress, and uniform. The talk was principally kept up by the
men, while the women were absorbed in watching every detail of the
ceremony, which always touches them so much.
  In the little group nearest the bride were her two sisters: Dolly,
and the younger one, the self-possessed beauty, Madame Lvova, who
had just arrived from abroad.
  "Why is it Marie's in lilac? It's as bad as black at a wedding,"
said Madame Korsunskaia.
  "With her complexion, it's her one salvation," responded Madame
Drubetskaia. "I wonder why they had the wedding in the evening? It's
like shop people...."
  "So much prettier. I was married in the evening too...." answered
Madame Korsunskaia, and she sighed, remembering how charming she had
been that day, and how absurdly in love her husband was, and how
different it all was now.
  "They say if anyone is best man more than ten times, he'll never
be married. I wanted to be one for the tenth time, but the post was
taken," said Count Siniavin to the pretty Princess Charskaia, who
had designs on him.
  Princess Charskaia only answered with a smile. She looked at
Kitty, thinking how and when she would stand with Count Siniavin in
Kitty's place, and how she would remind him then of his joke today.
  Shcherbatsky told the old Hoffraulein, Madame Nikoleva, that he
meant to put the crown on Kitty's chignon for luck.
  "She ought not to have worn a chignon," answered Madame Nikoleva,
who had long ago made up her mind that if the elderly widower she
was angling for married her, the wedding should be of the simplest. "I
don't like such faste."
  Sergei Ivanovich was talking to Darya Dmitrievna, jestingly assuring
her that the custom of going away after the wedding was becoming
common because newly married people always felt a little ashamed of
themselves.
  "Your brother may feel proud of himself. She's a marvel of
sweetness. I believe you're envious."
  "Oh, I've got over that, Darya Dmitrievna," he answered, and a
melancholy and serious expression suddenly came over his face.
  Stepan Arkadyevich was telling his sister-in-law his joke about
divorce.
  "The wreath wants setting straight," she answered, without listening
to him.
  "What a pity she's lost her looks so," Countess Nordstone said to
Madame Lvova. "Still, he's not worth her little finger, is he?"
  "Oh, I like him so- not because he's my future beau-frere," answered
Madame Lvova. "And how well he's behaving! It's so difficult, too,
to look well in such a position, not to be ridiculous. And he's not
ridiculous, and not affected; one can see he's moved."
  "You expected it, I suppose?"
  "Almost. She always cared for him."
  "Well, we shall see which of them will step on the rug first. I
warned Kitty."
  "It will make no difference," said Madame Lvova, "we're all obedient
wives; it's in our family."
  "Oh, I stepped on the rug before Vassilii on purpose. And you,
Dolly?"
  Dolly stood beside them; she heard them, but she did not answer. She
was deeply moved. The tears stood in her eyes, and she could not
have spoken without crying. She was rejoicing over Kitty and Levin;
going back in thought to her own wedding, she glanced at the radiant
figure of Stepan Arkadyevich, forgot all the present, and remembered
only her own innocent love. She recalled not herself only, but all her
women friends and acquaintances. She thought of them on the one day of
their triumph, when they had stood like Kitty under the wedding crown,
with love and hope and dread in their hearts, renouncing the past, and
stepping forward into the mysterious future. Among the brides that
came back to her memory, she thought too of her darling Anna, of whose
proposed divorce she had just been hearing. And she had stood just
as innocent, in orange blossoms and bridal veil. And now? "It's
terribly strange," she said to herself.
  It was not merely the sisters, the women friends, and the female
relations of the bride, who were following every detail of the
ceremony. Women who were quite strangers, mere spectators, were
watching it excitedly, holding their breath, in fear of losing a
single movement or expression of the bride and bridegroom, and angrily
not answering, often not hearing, the remarks of the callous men,
who kept making joking or irrelevant observations.
  "Why has she been crying? Is she being married against her will?"
  "Against her will- to a fine fellow like that? A Prince, isn't he?"
  "Is that her sister in the white satin? Just listen how the deacon
booms out, 'and obey!'"
  "Are the choristers from the church of the Miracle?"
  "No- from the Synodal school."
  "I'm told- he's going to take her home to his country place at once.
I asked the footman. Awfully rich, they say. That's why she's being
married to him."
  "No- they're a well-matched pair."
  "I say, Marya Vassilyevna, you claimed those flyaway crinolines were
not being worn. Just look at her in the puce dress- an ambassador's
wife, they say she is- see, how her skirt bounces!... So and so!"
  "What a pretty dear the bride is- like a lamb decked with flowers!
Well, say what you will, we women feel for our sister."
  Such were the comments in the crowd of gazing women who had
succeeded in slipping in at the church doors.
                             VI.

  When the ceremony of plighting troth was over, the sacristan
spread before the lectern in the middle of the church a piece of
pink silken stuff, the choir sang a complicated and elaborate psalm,
in which the bass and tenor sang responses to one another, and the
priest, turning round, pointed the bridal pair to the pink silk rug.
Though both had often heard a great deal about the saying that the one
who steps first on the rug will be the head of the house, neither
Levin nor Kitty were capable of recollecting it, as they took the
few steps toward it. They did not hear the loud remarks and disputes
that followed, some maintaining he had stepped on it first, and others
that both had stepped on it together.
  After the customary questions, whether they desired to enter upon
matrimony, and whether they were pledged to anyone else, and their
answers, which sounded strange to themselves, a new ceremony began.
Kitty listened to the words of the prayer, trying to make out their
meaning, but she could not. The feeling of triumph and radiant
happiness flooded her soul more and more as the ceremony went on,
and deprived her of all power of attention.
  They prayed: "Endow them with continence and fruitfulness, and
vouchsafe that their hearts may rejoice looking upon their sons and
daughters." They alluded to God's creation of a wife from Adam's
rib, "and for this cause a man shall leave father and mother, and
cleave unto his wife, and they two shall be one flesh," and that "this
is a great mystery;" they prayed that God would make them fruitful and
bless them, like Isaac and Rebecca, Joseph, Moses and Zipporah, and
that they might look upon their children's children. "That's all
splendid," thought Kitty, catching the words, "all that's just as it
should be," and a smile of happiness, unconsciously reflected in
everyone who looked at her, beamed on her radiant face.
  "Put it on completely!" voices were heard urging when, after the
priest had put on their wedding crowns, and Shcherbatsky, his hand
shaking in its three-button glove, was holding the crown high above
her head.
  "Put it on!" she whispered smiling.
  Levin looked round at her, and was struck by the joyful radiance
on her face, and unconsciously her feeling infected him. He too,
like her, felt joyous and happy.
  They enjoyed hearing the Epistle read, and the roll of the
protodeacon's voice at the last verse, awaited with such impatience by
the outside public. They enjoyed drinking out of the shallow cup of
warm red wine and water, and they were still more pleased when the
priest, flinging back his stole and taking both their hands in his,
led them round the lectern to the accompaniment of bass voices
chanting: "Isaiah rejoice!" Shcherbatsky and Chirikov, supporting
the crowns and stumbling over the bride's train, smiling too and
seeming delighted at something, were at one moment left behind, at the
next treading on the bridal pair as the priest came to a halt. The
spark of joy kindled in Kitty seemed to have infected everyone in
the church. It seemed to Levin that the priest and the deacon too
wanted to smile, just as he did.
  Taking the crowns off their heads the priest read the last prayer
and congratulated the young couple. Levin looked at Kitty, and he
had never before seen her look as she did. She was charming with the
new radiance of happiness in her face. Levin longed to say something
to her, but he did not know whether it was all over. The priest got
him out of his difficulty. He smiled his kindly smile and said gently,
"Kiss your wife- and you kiss your husband," and took the candles
out of their hands.
  Levin kissed her smiling lips with timid care, gave her his arm,
and, with a new strange sense of closeness, walked out of the
church. He did not believe, he could not believe, that it was true. It
was only when their wondering and timid eyes met that he believed in
it, because he felt that they were one.
  After supper, the same night, the young people left for the country.
                             VII.

  Vronsky and Anna had been traveling for three months together in
Europe. They had visited Venice, Rome and Naples, and had just arrived
at a small Italian town where they meant to stay some time.
  A handsome headwaiter, with thick pomaded hair parted from the
neck upward, wearing an evening coat, a broad white cambric shirt
front, and a bunch of watch charms dangling above his small bay
window, stood with his hands in his pockets, looking contemptuously
from under his eyelids, while he gave some frigid reply to a gentleman
who had stopped still. Catching the sound of footsteps coming from the
other side of the entry toward the staircase, the headwaiter turned
round, and, seeing the Russian Count, who had taken their best
rooms, he took his hands out of his pockets deferentially, and with
a bow informed him that a courier had come, and that the business
about the palazzo had been arranged. The steward was prepared to
sign the agreement.
  "Ah! I'm glad to hear it," said Vronsky. "Is Madame at home or not?"
  "Madame has been out for a walk but has returned now," answered
the waiter.
  Vronsky took off his soft, wide-brimmed hat and passed his
handkerchief over his heated brow and hair, which had grown half
over his ears, and was brushed back covering the bald patch on his
head. And, glancing casually at the gentleman, who still stood there
gazing intently at him, he would have gone on.
  "This gentleman is a Russian, and was inquiring after you," said the
headwaiter.
  With mingled feelings of annoyance at never being able to get away
from acquaintances anywhere, and longing to find some sort of
diversion from the monotony of his life, Vronsky looked once more at
the gentleman, who had retreated and stood still again, and at the
same moment a light came into the eyes of both.
  "Golenishchev!"
  "Vronsky!"
  It really was Golenishchev, a comrade of Vronsky's in the Corps of
Pages. In the Corps Golenishchev had belonged to the liberal party; he
left the Corps without entering the army, and had never taken office
under the government. Vronsky and he had gone completely different
ways on leaving the Corps, and had only met once since.
  At that meeting Vronsky perceived that Golenishchev had taken up a
sort of lofty intellectually liberal line, and was consequently
disposed to look down upon Vronsky's interests and calling in life.
Hence Vronsky had met him with the chilling and haughty manner he so
well knew how to assume, the meaning of which was: "You may like or
dislike my ways of life, that's a matter of the most perfect
indifference to me; you will have to treat me with respect if you want
to know me." Golenishchev had been contemptuously indifferent to the
tone taken by Vronsky. That meeting might have been expected to
estrange them still more. But now they beamed and exclaimed with
delight on recognizing one another. Vronsky would never have
expected to be so pleased to see Golenishchev, but probably he was not
himself aware how bored he was. He forgot the disagreeable
impression of their last meeting, and with a face of frank delight
held out his hand to his old comrade. The same expression of delight
replaced the look of uneasiness on Golenishchev's face.
  "How glad I am to meet you!" said Vronsky, showing his strong
white teeth in a friendly smile.
  "I heard the name Vronsky, but I didn't know which one. I'm very,
very glad!"
  "Let's go in. Come, tell me what you're doing."
  "I've been living here for two years. I'm working."
  "Ah!" said Vronsky, with sympathy. "Let's go in."
  And with the habit common among Russians, instead of saying in
Russian what he wanted to keep from the servants, he began to speak in
French.
  "Do you know Madame Karenina? We are traveling together. I am
going to see her now," he said in French, carefully scrutinizing
Golenishchev's face.
  "Ah, I did not know" (though he did know), Golenishchev answered
carelessly. "Have you been here long?" he added.
  "Three days," Vronsky answered, once more scrutinizing his
friend's face intently.
  "Yes, he's a decent fellow, and will look at the thing properly,"
Vronsky said to himself, catching the significance of Golenishchev's
face and the change of subject. "I can introduce him to Anna- he looks
at it properly."
  During the three months that Vronsky had spent abroad with Anna,
he had always on meeting new people asked himself how the new person
would look at his relations with Anna, and for the most part, in
men, he had met with the "proper" way of looking at it. But if he
had been asked, and those who looked at it "properly" had been asked
exactly how they did look at it, both he and they would have been
greatly puzzled to answer.
  In reality, those who in Vronsky's opinion had the "proper" view had
no sort of view at all, but behaved in general as well-bred persons do
behave in regard to all the complex and insoluble problems with
which life is encompassed on all sides; they behaved with propriety,
avoiding allusions and unpleasant questions. They assumed an air of
fully comprehending the import and force of the situation, of
accepting and even approving of it, but of considering it
superfluous and uncalled-for to put all this into words.
  Vronsky at once divined that Golenishchev was of this class, and
therefore was doubly pleased to see him. And, in fact,
Golenishchev's manner to Madame Karenina, when he was taken to call on
her, was all that Vronsky could have desired. Obviously without the
slightest effort he steered clear of all subjects which might lead
to embarrassment.
  He had never met Anna before, and was struck by her beauty, and,
still more, by the naturalness with which she accepted her position.
She blushed when Vronsky brought in Golenishchev, and he was extremely
charmed by this childish blush overspreading her candid and handsome
face. But what he liked particularly was the way in which at once,
as though on purpose, so that there might be no misunderstanding
with an outsider, she called Vronsky simply Alexei, and said they were
moving into a house they had just taken- what was here called a
palazzo. Golenishchev liked this direct and simple attitude to her own
position. Looking at Anna's manner of simplehearted, spirited
gaiety, and knowing Alexei Alexandrovich and Vronsky, Golenishchev
fancied that he understood her perfectly. He fancied that he
understood what she was utterly unable to understand: how it was that,
having made her husband wretched, having abandoned him and her son and
lost her good name, she yet felt full of spirits, gaiety, and
happiness.
  "It's in the guidebook," said Golenishchev, referring to the palazzo
Vronsky had taken. "There's a first-rate Tintoretto there. One of
his latest period."
  "I tell you what: it's a lovely day, let's go and have another
look at it," said Vronsky, addressing Anna.
  "I shall be very glad to; I'll go and put on my hat. Would you say
it's hot?" she said, stopping short in the doorway and looking
inquiringly at Vronsky. And again a vivid flush overspread her face.
  Vronsky saw from her eyes that she did not know on what terms he
cared to be with Golenishchev, and so was afraid of not behaving as he
would wish.
  He bestowed a long, tender look at her.
  "No, not very," he said.
  And it seemed to her that she understood everything- most of all,
that he was pleased with her; and, smiling to him, she walked with her
rapid step out of the door.
  The friends glanced at one another, and a look of hesitation came
into both faces, as though Golenishchev, unmistakably admiring her,
would have liked to say something about her, and could not find the
right thing to say, while Vronsky desired and dreaded his doing so.
  "Well then," Vronsky began, to start a conversation of some sort,
"so you're settled here? You're still at the same work, then?" he went
on, recalling that he had been told Golenishchev was writing
something.
  "Yes, I'm writing the second part of the Two Elements," said
Golenishchev, coloring with pleasure at the question- "that is, to
be exact, I am not writing it yet; I am preparing, collecting
materials. It will be of far wider scope, and will touch on almost all
questions. We in Russia refuse to see that we are the heirs of
Byzantium," and he launched into a long and heated explanation of
his views.
  Vronsky at the first moment felt embarrassed at not even knowing
of the first part of the Two Elements, of which the author spoke as
something well known. But as Golenishchev began to lay down his
opinions and Vronsky was able to follow them even without knowing
the Two Elements, he listened to him with some interest, for
Golenishchev spoke well. But Vronsky was startled and annoyed by the
nervous irascibility with which Golenishchev talked of the subject
that engrossed him. As he went on talking, his eyes glittered more and
more angrily; he was more and more hurried in his replies to imaginary
opponents, and his face grew more and more excited and worried.
Remembering Golenishchev, a thin, lively, good-natured and well-bred
boy, always at the head of the class, Vronsky could not make out the
reason for his irritability, and he did not like it. What he
particularly disliked was that Golenishchev, a man belonging to a good
set, should put himself on a level with some scribbling fellows with
whom he was irritated and angry. Was it worth it? Vronsky disliked it,
yet he felt that Golenishchev was unhappy, and was sorry for him.
Unhappiness, almost mental derangement, was visible on his mobile,
rather handsome face, as, without even noticing Anna's coming in, he
went on hurriedly and hotly expressing his views.
  When Anna came in in her hat and cape, her lovely hand rapidly
swinging her parasol, and stood beside him, it was with a feeling of
relief that Vronsky broke away from the plaintive eyes of Golenishchev
which fastened persistently upon him, and with a fresh rush of love
looked at his charming companion, full of life and happiness.
Golenishchev recovered himself with an effort, and at first was
dejected and gloomy, but Anna, disposed as she was at that time to
feel friendly with everyone, soon revived his spirits by her direct
and lively manner. After trying various subjects of conversation,
she got him upon painting, of which he talked very well, and she
listened to him attentively. They walked to the house they had taken
and looked over it.
  "I am very glad of one thing," said Anna to Golenishchev when they
were on their way back, "Alexei will have a capital atelier. You
must certainly take that room," she said to Vronsky in Russian,
using the affectionately familiar form, as though she saw that
Golenishchev would become intimate with them in their isolation, and
that there was no need of reserve before him.
  "Do you paint?" said Golenishchev turning round quickly to Vronsky.
  "Yes, I used to study long ago, and now I have begun to do a
little," said Vronsky, reddening.
  "He has great talent," said Anna with a delighted smile. "I'm no
judge, of course. But good judges have said the same."
                             VIII.

  Anna, in that first period of her emancipation and rapid return to
health, felt herself unpardonably happy and full of the joy of life.
The thought of her husband's unhappiness did not poison her happiness.
On one side that memory was too awful to be thought of. On the other
side her husband's unhappiness had given her too much happiness to
be regretted. The memory of all that had happened after her illness:
her reconciliation with her husband, the rupture, the news of
Vronsky's wound, his visit, the preparations for divorce, the
departure from her husband's house, the parting from her son- all that
seemed to her like a delirious dream, from which she had waked up
abroad, alone with Vronsky. The thought of the harm caused to her
husband aroused in her a feeling like repulsion, and akin to what a
drowning man might feel who has shaken off another man clinging to
him. That man did drown. It was an evil action, of course, but it
was the sole means of escape, and better not to brood over these
fearful facts.
  One consolatory reflection upon her conduct had occurred to her at
the first moment of the final rupture, and when now she recalled all
the past, she remembered that one reflection. "I have inevitably
made that man wretched," she thought; "but I don't want to profit by
his misery. I, too, am suffering, and shall suffer; I am losing what I
prized above everything- I am losing my good name and my son. I have
done wrong, and so I don't want happiness, I don't want a divorce, and
shall suffer from my shame and the separation from my child." But,
however sincerely Anna had meant to suffer, she was not suffering.
Shame there was none. With the tact of which both had such a large
share, they had succeeded in avoiding Russian ladies abroad, and so
had never placed themselves in a false position, and everywhere they
had met people who pretended that they perfectly understood their
position, far better indeed than they did themselves. Separation
from the son she loved- even that did not cause her anguish in these
early days. The baby girl- his child- was so sweet, and had so won
Anna's heart, since she was all that was left her, that Anna rarely
thought of her son.
  The desire for life, waxing stronger with recovered health, was so
intense, and the conditions of life were so new and pleasant, that
Anna felt unpardonably happy. The more she got to know Vronsky, the
more she loved him. She loved him for himself, and for his love for
her. Her complete ownership of him was a continual joy to her. His
presence was always sweet to her. All the traits of his character,
which she learned to know better and better, were unutterably dear
to her. His appearance, changed by his civilian dress, was as
fascinating to her as though she were some young girl in love. In
everything he said, thought, and did, she saw something particularly
noble and elevated. Her adoration of him alarmed her indeed; she
sought and could not find in him anything not fine. She dared not show
him her sense of her own insignificance beside him. It seemed to her
that, knowing this, he might sooner cease to love her; and she dreaded
nothing now so much as losing his love, though she had no grounds
for fearing it. But she could not help being grateful to him for his
attitude to her, and showing that she appreciated it. He, who had in
her opinion such a marked aptitude for a political career, in which he
would have been certain to play a leading part- he had sacrificed
his ambition for her sake, and never betrayed the slightest regret. He
was more lovingly respectful to her than ever, and the constant care
that she should not feel the awkwardness of her position never
deserted him for a single instant. He, so manly a man, never opposed
her, had indeed, with her, no will of his own, and was anxious, it
seemed, for nothing but to anticipate her wishes. And she could not
but appreciate this, even though the very intensity of his
solicitude for her, the atmosphere of care with which he surrounded
her, sometimes weighed upon her.
  Vronsky, meanwhile, in spite of the complete realization of what
he had so long desired, was not perfectly happy. He soon felt that the
realization of his desires gave him no more than a grain of sand out
of the mountain of happiness he had expected. It showed him the
mistake men make in picturing to themselves happiness as the
realization of their desires. For a time after joining his life to
hers, and putting on civilian dress, he had felt all the delight of
freedom in general, of which he had known nothing before, and of
freedom in his love- and he was content, but not for long. He was soon
aware that there was springing up in his heart a desire for desires-
longing. Without conscious intention he began to clutch at every
passing caprice, taking it for a desire and an object. Sixteen hours
of the day must be occupied in some way, since they were living abroad
in complete freedom, outside the conditions of social life which
filled up time in Peterburg. As for the amusements of bachelor
existence, which had provided Vronsky with entertainment on previous
tours abroad, they could not be thought of, since the sole attempt
of the sort had led to a sudden attack of depression in Anna, quite
out of proportion with the cause- a late supper with bachelor friends.
Relations with the society of the place- foreign and Russian- were
equally out of the question, owing to the irregularity of their
position. The inspection of objects of interest, apart from the fact
that everything had been seen already, had not for Vronsky, a
Russian and a sensible man, the inexplicable significance Englishmen
are able to attach to that pursuit.
  And, just as the hungry animal eagerly clutches every object it
can get, hoping to find nourishment in it, Vronsky quite unconsciously
clutched first at politics, then at new books, and then at pictures.
  As he had, ever since he was a child, a taste for painting, and
as, not knowing what to spend his money on, he had begun collecting
engravings, he came to a stop at painting, began to take interest in
it, and concentrated upon it the unoccupied fund of desires which
demanded satisfaction.
  As he had a capacity for understanding art, and for true and
tasteful imitation in the art of painting, he supposed himself to have
the real thing essential for an artist, and after hesitating for
some time which style of painting to select- religious, historical,
realistic, or genre painting- he set to work to paint. He
appreciated all kinds, and could have felt inspired by any one of
them; but he had no conception of the possibility of knowing nothing
at all of any school of painting, and of being inspired directly by
what is within the soul, without caring whether what is painted will
belong to any recognized school. Since he knew nothing of this, and
drew his inspiration, not directly from life, but indirectly from life
embodied in art, his inspiration came very quickly and easily, and
as quickly and easily came his success in painting something very
similar to the sort of painting he was trying to imitate.
  More than any other style he liked the French- graceful and
effective- and in that style he began to paint Anna's portrait in
Italian costume, and the portrait seemed to him, and to everyone who
saw it, extremely successful.
                             IX.

  The old neglected palazzo, with its lofty plastic plafonds and
frescoes on the walls, with its floors of mosaic, with its heavy
yellow stuff curtains on the windows, with its vases on pedestals, and
its open fireplaces, its carved doors and gloomy reception rooms
hung with pictures- this palazzo did much, by its very appearance
after they had moved into it, to confirm in Vronsky the agreeable
illusion that he was not so much a Russian country gentleman, a
retired officer of the life guards, as an enlightened amateur and
patron of the arts, himself a modest artist who had renounced the
world, his connections, and his ambition for the sake of the woman
he loved.
  The pose chosen by Vronsky with their removal into the palazzo was
completely successful, and having, through Golenishchev, made the
acquaintance of a few interesting people, for a time he was satisfied.
He painted studies from nature under the guidance of an Italian
professor of painting, and studied medieval Italian life. Medieval
Italian life so fascinated Vronsky that even his hat, and a plaid
flung over his shoulder, were worn in the medieval style, which,
indeed, was extremely becoming to him.
  "Here we live, and know nothing of what's going on," Vronsky said to
Golenishchev, when the latter came to see him one morning. "Have you
seen Mikhailov's picture?" he said, handing him a Russian gazette he
had received that morning, and pointing to an article on a Russian
artist, living in the very same town, and just finishing a picture
which had long been talked about, and had been bought beforehand.
The article reproached the government and the academy for letting so
remarkable an artist be left without encouragement and support.
  "I've seen it," answered Golenishchev. "Of course, he's not
without talent, but it's all in a wrong direction. It's all the
Ivanov-Strauss-Renan attitude to Christ and to religious painting."
  "What is the subject of the picture?" asked Anna.
  "Christ before Pilate. Christ is represented as a Jew with all the
realism of the new school."
  And the question of the subject of the picture having brought him to
one of his favorite theories, Golenishchev launched forth into a
disquisition on it.
  "I can't understand how they can fall into such a gross mistake.
Christ always has His definite embodiment in the art of the great
masters. And therefore, if they want to depict, not God, but a
revolutionist or a sage, let them take from history a Socrates, a
Franklin, a Charlotte Corday, but not Christ. They take the very
figure which cannot be taken for their art, and then..."
  "And is it true that this Mikhailov is in such poverty?" asked
Vronsky, thinking that, as a Russian Maecenas, it was his duty to
assist the artist regardless of whether the picture were good or bad.
  "Hardly. He's a remarkable portrait painter. Have you ever seen
his portrait of Madame Vassilkova? But I believe he doesn't care about
painting any more portraits, and so, likely as not, he may be in want.
I maintain that..."
  "Couldn't we ask him to paint a portrait of Anna Arkadyevna?" said
Vronsky.
  "Why mine?" said Anna. "After yours I don't want another portrait.
Better have one of Annie" (so she called her baby girl). "Here she
is," she added, looking out of the window at the handsome Italian
nurse, who was carrying the child out into the garden, and immediately
glancing, unperceived, at Vronsky. The handsome nurse, from whom
Vronsky was painting a head for his picture, was the one hidden
grief in Anna's life. He painted with her as his model, admired her
beauty and medievalism, and Anna dared not confess to herself that she
was afraid of becoming jealous of this nurse, and was for that
reason particularly gracious and condescending both to her and her
little son.
  Vronsky, too, glanced out of the window and into Anna's eyes, and,
turning at once to Golenishchev, he said:
  "Do you know this Mikhailov?"
  "I have met him. But he's a queer fish, and quite without
breeding. You know, one of those savage new people one is forever
coming across nowadays; one of those freethinkers, you know, who are
reared d'emblee in theories of atheism, negation, and materialism.
In former days," said Golenishchev, not observing, or not willing to
observe, that both Anna and Vronsky wanted to speak, "in former days
the freethinker was a man who had been brought up in ideas of
religion, law, and morality, and only through conflict and struggle
came to free thought; but now there has sprung up a new type of native
freethinker who grows up without even having heard of principles of
morality or of religion, of the existence of authorities, who grows up
directly in ideas of negation in everything, that is to say, a savage.
Well, he's of that class. He's the son, it appears, of some Moscow
butler, and has never had any sort of bringing-up. When he got into
the academy and made his reputation he tried, as he's no fool, to
educate himself. And he turned to what seemed to him the very source
of culture- the magazines. In old times, you see, a man who wanted
to educate himself- a Frenchman, for instance- would have set to
work to study all the classics: theologians and tragedians and
historians and philosophers, and, you see, all the intellectual work
that came in his way. But in our day he goes straight for the
literature of negation, very quickly assimilates all the extracts of
the science of negation, and he's all set. And that's not all-
twenty years ago he would have found in that literature traces of
conflict with authorities, with the creeds of the ages; he would
have perceived from this conflict that there was something else; but
now he comes at once upon a literature in which the old creeds do
not even furnish matter for discussion, but it is stated baldly that
there is nothing else; just evolution, natural selection, the struggle
for existence- and that's all. In my article I've..."
  "I tell you what," said Anna, who had for a long while been
exchanging wary glances with Vronsky, and knew that he was not in
the least interested in the education of this artist, but was simply
absorbed by the idea of assisting him, and ordering a portrait of him;
"I tell you what," she said, resolutely interrupting Golenishchev, who
was still talking away, "let's go and see him!"
  Golenishchev recovered his self-possession and readily agreed.
But, as the artist lived in a remote ward of the town, it was
decided to take a carriage.
  An hour later Anna, with Golenishchev by her side and Vronsky on the
front seat of the carriage, facing them, drove up to an ugly new house
in a remote ward. On learning from the porter's wife, who came out
to them, that Mikhailov saw visitors at his studio, but that at that
moment he was in his lodging only a couple of steps off, they sent her
to him with their cards, asking permission to see his pictures.
                             X.

  The artist Mikhailov was, as always, at work when the cards of Count
Vronsky and Golenishchev were brought to him. In the morning he had
been working in his studio at his big picture. On getting home he flew
into a rage with his wife for not having managed to put off the
landlady, who had been asking for money.
  "I've said it to you twenty times, don't enter into details.
You're fool enough at all times, and when you start explaining
things in Italian you're a triple fool," he said after a long dispute.
  "Don't let it run so long; it's not my fault. If I had the money..."
  "Leave me in peace, for God's sake!" Mikhailov shrieked, with
tears in his voice, and, stopping his ears, he went off into his
working room, on the other side of a partition wall, and closed the
door after him. "There's no sense in her!" he said to himself, sat
down to the table, and, opening a portfolio, he set to work at once
with peculiar fervor at a sketch he had begun.
  Never did he work with such fervor and success as when things went
ill with him, and especially when he quarreled with his wife. "Oh!
damn them all!" he thought as he went on working. He was making a
sketch for the figure of a man in a violent rage. A sketch had been
made before, but he was dissatisfied with it. "No, that one was
better.... Where is it?" He went back to his wife, and, scowling and
not looking at her, asked his eldest little girl: Where was that piece
of paper he had given them? The paper with the discarded sketch on
it was found, but it was dirty, and spotted with candle grease. Still,
he took the sketch, laid it on his table, and, moving a little away,
screwing up his eyes, he fell to gazing at it. All at once he smiled
and gesticulated gleefully.
  "That's it! That's it!" he said, and, at once picking up the pencil,
he began drawing rapidly. The spot of tallow had given the man a new
pose.
  He had sketched this new pose, when all at once he recalled the face
of a shopkeeper of whom he had bought cigars, a vigorous face with a
prominent chin, and he sketched this very face, this chin, on to the
figure of the man. He laughed aloud with delight. The figure from a
lifeless imagined thing had become living, and such that it could
never be changed. That figure lived, and was clearly and
unmistakably defined. The sketch might be corrected in accordance with
the requirements of the figure; the legs, indeed, could and must be
put differently, and the position of the left hand must be quite
altered; the hair, too, might be thrown back. But in making these
corrections he was not altering the figure but simply getting rid of
what concealed the figure. He was, as it were, stripping off the veils
which hindered it from being distinctly seen; each new feature only
brought out the whole figure in all its force and vigor, as it had
suddenly come to him from the spot of tallow. He was carefully
finishing the figure when the cards were brought him.
  "Coming, coming!"
  He went in to his wife.
  "Come, Sasha, don't be cross!" he said, smiling timidly and
affectionately at her. "You were to blame. I was to blame. I'll make
it all right." And, having made peace with his wife, he put on an
olive-green overcoat with a velvet collar and a hat, and went toward
his studio. The successful figure he had already forgotten. Now he was
delighted and excited at the visit of these people of consequence,
Russians, who had come in their carriage.
  Of his picture, the one that stood now on his easel, he had at the
bottom of his heart one conviction- that no one had ever painted a
picture like it. He did not believe that this picture was better
than all the pictures of Raphael, but he knew that what he tried to
convey in that picture no one ever had conveyed. This he knew
positively, and had known a long while, ever since he had begun to
paint it. But other people's criticisms, whatever they might be, had
yet immense consequence in his eyes, and they agitated him to the
depths of his soul. Any remark, the most insignificant, which showed
that the critic saw even the tiniest part of what he himself saw in
the picture, agitated him to the depths of his soul. He always
attributed to his judges a more profound comprehension than he had
himself, and always expected from them something he did not himself
see in the picture. And often in their criticisms he fancied that he
found this.
  He walked rapidly to the door of his studio, and in spite of his
excitement he was struck by the soft light on Anna's figure as she
stood in the shade of the entrance listening to Golenishchev, who
was eagerly telling her something, while she evidently wanted to
look round at the artist. He was himself unconscious how, as he
approached them, he seized on this impression and absorbed it, as he
had the chin of the shopkeeper who had sold him the cigars, and put it
away somewhere to be brought out when he wanted it. The visitors,
not agreeably impressed beforehand by Golenishchev's account of the
artist, were still less so by his personal appearance. Thickset and of
middle height, with nimble movements, with his brown hat,
olive-green coat and narrow trousers- though wide trousers had been
a long while in fashion- most of all, with the ordinariness of his
broad face, and the combined expression of timidity and anxiety to
keep up his dignity, Mikhailov made an unpleasant impression.
  "Please step in," he said, trying to look indifferent, and going
into the passage he took a key out of his pocket and opened the door.
                             XI.

  On entering the studio, Mikhailov once more scanned his visitors and
noted down in his imagination Vronsky's expression too, and especially
his jaws. Although his artistic sense was unceasingly at work
collecting materials, although he felt a continually increasing
excitement as the moment of criticizing his work drew nearer, he
rapidly and subtly formed, from imperceptible signs, a mental image of
these three persons. That fellow (Golenishchev) was a Russian living
here. Mikhailov did not remember his surname nor where he had met him,
nor what he had said to him. He only remembered his face as he
remembered all the faces he had ever seen; but he remembered, too,
that it was one of the faces laid by in his memory in the immense
class of the falsely consequential and poor in expression. The
abundant hair and very open forehead gave an appearance of consequence
to the face, which had only one expression- a petty, childish, peevish
expression, concentrated just above the bridge of the narrow nose.
Vronsky and Madame Karenina must be, Mikhailov supposed, distinguished
and wealthy Russians, knowing nothing about art, like all those
wealthy Russians, but posing as amateurs and connoisseurs. "Most
likely they've already looked at all the antiques, and now they're
making the round of the studios of the new people- the German
humbug, and the cracked Pre-Raphaelite English fellow- and have only
come to me to make the point of view complete," he thought. He was
well acquainted with the way dilettanti have (the cleverer they were
the worse he found them) of looking at the works of contemporary
artists with the sole object of being in a position to say that art is
lost, and the more one sees of the new men the more one sees how
inimitable the works of the great old masters have remained. He
expected all this; he saw it all in their faces, he saw it in the
careless indifference with which they talked among themselves,
stared at the lay figures and busts, and walked about in leisurely
fashion, waiting for him to uncover his picture. But in spite of this,
while he was turning over his studies, pulling up the blinds and
taking off the sheet, he was in intense excitement, especially as,
in spite of his conviction that all distinguished and wealthy Russians
were certain to be beasts and fools, he liked Vronsky, and still
more Anna.
  "Here, if you please," he said, moving on one side with his nimble
gait and pointing to his picture, "it's the exhortation by Pilate.
Matthew, chapter 27," he said, feeling his lips were beginning to
tremble with emotion. He moved away and stood behind them.
  For the few seconds during which the visitors were gazing at the
picture in silence, Mikhailov too gazed at it with the indifferent eye
of an outsider. For those few seconds he was sure in anticipation that
a higher, juster criticism would be uttered by them, by those very
visitors whom he had been despising so a moment before. He forgot
all he had thought about his picture before, during the three years he
had been painting it; he forgot all its qualities, which had been
absolutely certain to him- he saw the picture with their
indifferent, new, outside eyes, and saw nothing good in it. He saw
in the foreground Pilate's irritated face and the serene face of
Christ, and in the background the figures of Pilate's retinue and
the face of John watching what was happening. Every face that, with
such exertion, such blunders and corrections had grown up within him
with its special character, every face that had given him such
torments and such raptures, and all these faces so many times
transposed for the sake of the harmony of the whole, all the shades of
color and tones that he had attained with such labor- all of this
together seemed to him now, looking at it with their eyes, the
merest vulgarity, something that had been done a thousand times
over. The face dearest to him, the face of Christ, the center of the
picture, which had given him such ecstasy as it unfolded itself to
him, was utterly lost to him when he glanced at the picture with their
eyes. He saw a well-painted (no, not even that- he distinctly saw
now a mass of defects) repetition of those endless Christs of
Titian, Raphael, Rubens, and the same soldiers and Pilate. It was
all common, poor, and stale, and badly painted- weak and motley.
They would be justified in repeating hypocritically courteous speeches
in the presence of the painter, and pitying him and laughing at him
when they were alone again.
  The silence (though it lasted no more than a minute) became too
intolerable to him. To break it, and to show he was not agitated, he
made an effort and addressed Golenishchev.
  "I think I've had the pleasure of meeting you," he said, looking
uneasily first at Anna, then at Vronsky, in fear of losing any shade
of their expression.
  "To be sure! We met at Rossi's; do you remember, at that soiree when
that Italian lady recited- the new Rachel?" Golenishchev answered
easily, removing his eyes without the slightest regret from the
picture and turning to the artist.
  Noticing, however, that Mikhailov was expecting a criticism of the
picture, he said:
  "Your picture has got on a great deal since I saw it last time;
and what strikes me particularly now, as it did then, is the figure of
Pilate. One so knows the man: a good-natured, capital fellow, but an
official through and through, who knows not what he doth. But I
fancy..."
  All of Mikhailov's mobile face beamed at once; his eyes sparkled. He
tried to say something, but he could not speak for excitement, and
pretended to be coughing. Low as was his opinion of Golenishchev's
capacity for understanding art, trifling as was the true remark upon
the fidelity of the expression of Pilate as an official, and offensive
as might have seemed the utterance of so unimportant an observation
while nothing was said of more serious points, Mikhailov was in an
ecstasy of delight at this observation. He had himself thought about
Pilate's figure just what Golenishchev had said. The fact that this
reflection was but one of millions of reflections, which, as Mikhailov
knew for certain, would be true, did not diminish for him the
significance of Golenishchev's remark. His heart warmed to
Golenishchev for this remark, and from a state of depression he
suddenly passed to ecstasy. At once the whole of his picture lived
before him in all the indescribable complexity of everything living.
Mikhailov again tried to say that that was how he understood Pilate,
but his lips quivered intractably, and he could not pronounce the
words. Vronsky and Anna too said something in that subdued voice which
(partly to avoid hurting the artist's feelings and partly to avoid
giving loud utterance to something silly- so easily done when
talking of art) people use at exhibitions of pictures. Mikhailov
fancied that the picture had made an impression on them too. He went
up to them.
  "How marvelous Christ's expression is!" said Anna. Of all she saw
she liked that expression most of all, and she felt that it was the
center of the picture, and so praise of it would be pleasant to the
artist. "One can see that He is pitying Pilate."
  This again was one of the million true reflections that could be
found in his picture and in the figure of Christ. She said that He was
pitying Pilate. In Christ's expression there ought to be indeed an
expression of pity, since there is an expression of love, of unearthly
peace, of preparedness for death, and a sense of the vanity of
words. Of course, there is the expression of an official in Pilate,
and of pity in Christ, considering that one is the incarnation of
the fleshly, and the other of the spiritual, life. All this and much
more flashed into Mikhailov's thoughts. And his face beamed with
delight again.
  "Yes, and how that figure is done- what atmosphere! One can walk
round it," said Golenishchev, unmistakably betraying by this remark
that he did not approve of the meaning and idea of the figure.
  "Yes, there's a wonderful mastery!" said Vronsky. "How those figures
in the background stand out! There you have technique," he said,
addressing Golenishchev, alluding to a conversation between them about
Vronsky's despair of attaining this technique.
  "Yes, yes, marvelous!" Golenishchev and Anna assented.
  In spite of the excited condition in which he was, the sentence
about technique had sent a pang to Mikhailov's heart, and looking
angrily at Vronsky he suddenly scowled. He had often heard this word
"technique," and was utterly unable to understand what was meant by
it. He knew that by this term was meant a mechanical dexterity for
painting or drawing, entirely apart from its subject. He had noticed
often that even in actual praise technique was opposed to essential
quality, as though one could paint well something that was bad. He
knew that a great deal of attention and care was necessary in taking
off the veils, to avoid injuring the creation itself, and to take
off all the veils; but there was no art of painting- no technique of
any sort- about it. If to a little child or to his cook were
revealed what he saw, either would have been able to peel the veils
off what was seen. And the most experienced and adroit painter could
not by mere mechanical faculty paint anything if the lines of the
subject were not revealed to him first. Besides, he saw that if it
came to talking about technique, it was impossible to praise him for
it. In all he had painted he saw faults that hurt his eyes, coming
from want of care in taking off the veils- faults he could not correct
now without spoiling the whole. And in almost all the figures and
faces he saw, too, remnants of the veils not perfectly removed that
spoiled the picture.
  "One thing might be said, if you will allow me to make the
remark..." observed Golenishchev.
  "Oh, I shall be delighted, I beg of you to do so," said Mikhailov
with a forced smile.
  "That is, you make Him the man-god, and not the God-man. But I
know that was what you meant to do."
  "I cannot paint a Christ that is not in my heart," said Mikhailov
morosely.
  "Yes; but in that case, if you will allow me to say what I
think... Your picture is so fine that my observation cannot detract
from it, and, besides, it is only my personal opinion. With you it
is different. Your very motive is different. But let us take Ivanov. I
imagine that if Christ is brought down to the level of an historical
character, it would have been better for Ivanov to select some other
historical subject, fresh, untouched."
  "But if this is the greatest subject presented to art?"
  "If one looked one would find others. But the point is that art
cannot suffer doubt and discussion. And before the picture of Ivanov
the question arises for the believer and the unbeliever alike, 'Is
it God, or is it not God?' and the unity of the impression is
destroyed."
  "Why so? I think that, for educated people," said Mikhailov, "the
question cannot exist."
  Golenishchev did not agree with this, and confounded Mikhailov by
his support of his first idea of the unity of the impression being
essential to art.
  Mikhailov was greatly perturbed, but he could say nothing in defense
of his own idea.
                             XII.

  Anna and Vronsky had long been exchanging glances, regretting
their friend's flow of cleverness. At last Vronsky, without waiting
for the artist, walked away to another small picture.
  "Oh, how exquisite! What a lovely thing! A gem! How exquisite!" they
cried with one voice.
  "What is it they're so pleased with?" thought Mikhailov. He had
positively forgotten that picture he had painted three years ago. He
had forgotten all the agonies and the ecstasies he had lived through
with that picture when, for several months, it had been the one
thought haunting him day and night. He had forgotten, as he always
forgot, the pictures he had finished. He did not even like to look
at it, and had only brought it out because he was expecting an
Englishman who wanted to buy it.
  "Oh, that's only an old study," he said.
  "How fine!" said Golenishchev, he too, with unmistakable
sincerity, falling under the spell of the picture.
  Two boys were angling in the shade of a willow tree. The elder had
just dropped in the hook, and was carefully pulling the float from
behind a bush, entirely absorbed in what he was doing. The other, a
little younger, was lying in the grass leaning on his elbows, with his
tangled, flaxen head in his hands, staring at the water with his
dreamy blue eyes. What was he thinking of?
  The enthusiasm over this picture stirred some of the old feeling for
it in Mikhailov, but he feared and disliked this waste of feeling
for things past, and so, even though this praise was grateful to
him, he tried to draw his visitors away to a third picture.
  But Vronsky asked whether the picture was for sale? To Mikhailov
at that moment, excited by visitors, it was extremely distasteful to
speak of money matters.
  "It is put up there to be sold," he answered, scowling gloomily.
  When the visitors had gone, Mikhailov sat down opposite the
picture of Pilate and Christ, and in his mind went over what had
been said, and what, though not said, had been implied by those
visitors. And, strange to say, what had had such weight with him,
while they were there and while he mentally put himself at their point
of view, suddenly lost all importance for him. He began to look at his
picture with all his own full, artist's vision, and was soon in that
mood of conviction of the perfectibility, and so of the
significance, of his picture- a conviction essential to the
intensest fervor, excluding all other interests- in which alone he
could work.
  Christ's foreshortened leg was not right, though. He took his
palette and began to work. As he corrected the leg he looked
continually at the figure of John in the background, which his
visitors had not even noticed, but which he knew was beyond
perfection. When he had finished the leg he wanted to touch that
figure, but he felt too much excited for that. He was equally unable
to work when he was cold and when he was too much affected and saw
everything too clearly. There was only one stage in the transition
from coldness to inspiration, at which work was possible. Today he was
too much agitated. He would have covered the picture, but he
stopped, holding the cloth in his hand, and, smiling blissfully, gazed
a long while at the figure of John. At last, tearing himself away with
evident regret, he dropped the cloth, and, exhausted but happy, went
home.
  Vronsky, Anna, and Golenishchev, on their way home, were
particularly lively and cheerful. They talked of Mikhailov and his
pictures. The word talent, by which they meant an inborn, almost
physical, aptitude apart from brain and heart, and in which they tried
to find an expression for all the artist had gained from life,
recurred particularly often in their talk, as though it were necessary
for them to sum up what they had no conception of, though they
wanted to talk of it. They said that there was no denying his
talent, but that his talent could not develop for want of education-
the common defect of our Russian artists. But the picture of the
boys had imprinted itself on their memories, and they were continually
coming back to it. "What an exquisite thing! How he has succeeded in
it, and how simply! He doesn't even comprehend how good it is. Yes,
I mustn't let it slip; I must buy it," said Vronsky.
                             XIII.

  Mikhailov sold Vronsky his picture, and agreed to paint a portrait
of Anna. On the day fixed he came and began the work.
  From the fifth sitting the portrait impressed everyone, especially
Vronsky, not only by its resemblance, but by its characteristic
beauty. It was strange how Mikhailov could have discovered precisely
the beauty characteristic of her. "One needs to know and love her as I
have loved her to discover the very sweetest expression of her
soul," Vronsky thought, though it was only from this portrait that
he had himself learned this sweetest expression of her soul. But the
expression was so true that he, and others too, fancied they had
long known it.
  "I have been struggling on for ever so long without doing anything,"
he said of his own portrait of her, "and he just looked and painted
it. That's where technique comes in."
  "That will come," was the consoling reassurance given him by
Golenishchev, in whose view Vronsky had both talent, and, what was
most important, education, giving him an exalted outlook on art.
Golenishchev's faith in Vronsky's talent was propped up by his own
need of Vronsky's sympathy and approval for his own essays and
ideas, and he felt that the praise and support must be mutual.
  In another man's house, and especially in Vronsky's palazzo,
Mikhailov was quite a different man from what he was in his studio. He
behaved with hostile deference, as though he were afraid of coming
closer to people he did not respect. He called Vronsky "Your
Excellency," and, notwithstanding Anna's and Vronsky's invitations, he
would never stay to dinner, nor come except for the sittings. Anna was
even more friendly to him than to other people, and was very
grateful for her portrait. Vronsky was more than courteous with him,
and was obviously interested to know the artist's opinion of his
picture. Golenishchev never let slip an opportunity of instilling
sound ideas about art into Mikhailov. But Mikhailov remained equally
chilly to all of these people. Anna was aware from his eyes that he
liked to look at her, but he avoided conversation with her.
Vronsky's talk about his painting he met with stubborn silence, and he
was as stubbornly silent when he was shown Vronsky's picture. He was
unmistakably bored by Golenishchev's conversation, and he did not
attempt to oppose him.
  Altogether Mikhailov, with his reserved and disagreeable, and,
apparently, hostile attitude, was quite disliked by them as they got
to know him better; and they were glad when the sittings were over,
and they were left with a magnificent portrait in their possession,
and he gave up coming.
  Golenishchev was the first to give expression to an idea that had
occurred to all of them- which was that Mikhailov was simply envious
of Vronsky.
  "Not envious, let us say, since he has talent; but it annoys him
that a wealthy man of the highest society, and a Count, too (you
know these fellows detest all that), can, without any particular
trouble, do as well, if not better, than he who has devoted all his
life to it. And, more than all, it's a question of education, which he
lacks."
  Vronsky defended Mikhailov, but at the bottom of his heart he
believed this, because in his view a man of a different, lower world
would be sure to be envious.
  Anna's portrait- the same subject painted from nature both by him
and by Mikhailov- ought to have shown Vronsky the difference between
him and Mikhailov; but he did not see it. Only after Mikhailov's
portrait was painted did he leave off painting his own portrait of
Anna, deciding that it was no longer needed. His picture of medieval
life he went on with. And he himself, and Golenishchev, and, still
more, Anna, thought it very good, because it was far more like the
celebrated pictures they knew than Mikhailov's picture.
  Mikhailov meanwhile, although Anna's portrait greatly fascinated
him, was even more glad than they were when the sittings were over,
and he had no longer to listen to Golenishchev's disquisitions upon
art, and could forget about Vronsky's painting. He knew that Vronsky
could not be prevented from amusing himself with painting; he knew
that he and all dilettanti had a perfect right to paint what they
liked, but it was distasteful to him. A man could not be prevented
from making himself a big wax doll, and kissing it. But if the man
were to come with the doll and sit before a man in love, and begin
caressing his doll as the lover caressed the woman he loved, it
would be distasteful to the lover. Just such a distasteful sensation
was what Mikhailov felt at the sight of Vronsky's painting: he felt it
both ludicrous and irritating, both pitiable and offensive.
  Vronsky's interest in painting and the Middle Ages did not last
long. He had enough taste for painting to be unable to finish his
picture. The picture came to a standstill. He was vaguely aware that
its defects, inconspicuous at first, would be glaring if he were to go
on with it. The same experience befell him as Golenishchev, who felt
that he had nothing to say, and continually deceived himself with
the theory that his idea was not yet mature, that he was working it
out and collecting material. This exasperated and tortured
Golenishchev, but Vronsky was incapable of deceiving and torturing
himself, and even more incapable of exasperation. With his
characteristic decision, without explanation or apology, he simply
ceased work at painting.
  But, without this occupation, the life of Vronsky and of Anna, who
wondered at his loss of interest in it, struck them as intolerably
tedious in an Italian town; the palazzo suddenly seemed so obtrusively
old and dirty, the spots on the curtains, the cracks in the floors,
the broken plaster on the cornices, became so disagreeably obvious,
and the everlasting sameness of Golenishchev, and the Italian
professor, and the German traveler, became so wearisome, that they had
to make some change. They resolved to go to Russia, to the country. In
Peterburg Vronsky intended to arrange a partition of the land with his
brother, while Anna meant to see her son. The summer they intended
to spend on Vronsky's great family estate.
                             XIV.

  Levin had been married two months. He was happy, but not at all in
the way he had expected to be. At every step he found disenchantment
in his former dreams, and new, unexpected enchantment. He was happy;
but on entering upon family life he saw at every step that it was
utterly different from what he had imagined. At every step he
experienced what a man would experience who, after admiring the
smooth, happy course of a little boat on a lake, should get himself
into that little boat. He saw that it was not all sitting still, and
floating smoothly; that one had to think too, not for an instant
forgetting where one was floating; and that there was water under one,
and that one must row; and that his unaccustomed hands would be
sore; and that it was only easy to look at; but that doing it,
though very delightful was very difficult.
  As a bachelor, when he had watched other people's married life,
had seen the petty cares, the squabbles, the jealousy, he had only
smiled contemptuously in his heart. In his future married life there
could be, he was convinced, nothing of that sort; even the external
forms, indeed, he fancied, must be utterly unlike the life of others
in everything. And all of a sudden, instead of his life with his
wife being made on an individual pattern, it was, on the contrary,
entirely made up of the pettiest details, which he had so despised
before, but which now, by no will of his own, had gained an
extraordinary and indisputable importance. And Levin saw that the
organization of all these details was by no means so easy as he had
fancied before. Although Levin believed himself to have the most exact
conceptions of domestic life, unconsciously, like all men, he pictured
domestic life only as enjoyment of love, with nothing to hinder and no
petty cares to distract. He ought, as he conceived the position, to do
his work, and to find repose from it in the happiness of love. She
ought to be beloved, and nothing more. But, like all men, he forgot
that she too would want work. And he was surprised that she, his
poetic, exquisite Kitty, could not merely in the first weeks, but even
in the first days of their married life, think, remember, and busy
herself about tablecloths, and furniture, about mattresses for
visitors, about a tray, about the cook, and the dinner, and so on.
While they were still engaged, he had been struck by the
definiteness with which she had declined the tour abroad and decided
to go into the country, as though she knew of something she wanted,
and could still think of something outside her love. This had jarred
upon him then, and now her trivial cares and anxieties jarred upon him
several times. But he saw that this was essential for her. And, loving
her as he did, though he did not understand the reason for them, and
jeered at these domestic pursuits, he could not help admiring them. He
jeered at the way in which she arranged the furniture they had brought
from Moscow; rearranged their rooms; hung up curtains; prepared
rooms for visitors, and for Dolly; saw after an abode for her new
maid; ordered dinner of the old cook; came into collision with Agathya
Mikhailovna, taking from her the charge of the stores. He saw how
the old cook smiled, admiring her, and listening to her inexperienced,
impossible orders; how mournfully and tenderly Agathya Mikhailovna
shook her head over the young mistress's new arrangements in the
pantry. He saw that Kitty was extraordinarily sweet when, laughing and
crying, she came to tell him that her maid, Masha, was used to looking
upon her as her young lady, and so no one obeyed her. It seemed to him
sweet, but strange, and he thought it would have been better without
this.
  He did not know how great a sense of change she was experiencing;
she, who at home had sometimes wanted some pickled cabbage, or sweets,
without the possibility of getting either, now could order what she
liked, buy pounds of sweets, spend as much money as she liked, and
order any cakes she pleased.
  She was dreaming with delight now of Dolly's coming to them with her
children, especially because she would order for the children their
favorite cakes, and Dolly would appreciate all her new housekeeping.
She did not know herself why and wherefore, but the arranging of her
house had an irresistible attraction for her. Instinctively feeling
the approach of spring, and knowing that there would be days of
rough weather too, she built her nest as best she could, and was in
haste at the same time to build and to learn how to do it.
  This care for domestic details in Kitty, so opposed to Levin's ideal
of exalted happiness, was at first one of the disenchantments; and
this sweet care of her household, the aim of which he did not
understand, but could not help loving, was one of the new
enchantments.
  Another disenchantment and enchantment consisted of their
quarrels. Levin could never have conceived that between him and his
wife any relations could arise other than tender, respectful and
loving, and all at once, in the very early days, they quarreled, so
that she said he did not care for her, that he cared for no one but
himself, burst into tears, and waved her hands.
  This first quarrel arose from Levin's having gone out to a new
grange and having been away half an hour too long, because he had
tried to get home by a short cut and had lost his way. He drove home
thinking of nothing but her, of her love, of his own happiness, and,
the nearer he drew to home, the warmer was his tenderness for her.
He ran into the room with the same feeling, with an even stronger
feeling, than he had had when he reached the Shcherbatskys' house to
propose. And suddenly he was met by a lowering expression he had never
seen in her. He would have kissed her, she pushed him away.
  "What is it?"
  "You've been enjoying yourself..." she began, trying to be calm
and spiteful.
  But as soon as she opened her mouth, she burst into a stream of
reproach, of senseless jealousy, of all that had been torturing her
during that half-hour which she had spent sitting motionless at the
window. It was only then, for the first time, that he clearly
understood what he had not understood when he led her out of the
church after the wedding. He felt now that he was not simply close
to her, but that he did not know where he ended and she began. He felt
this from the agonizing sensation of division that he experienced at
that instant. He was offended for the first instant, but the very same
second he felt that he could not be offended by her, that she was
himself. He felt for the first moment as a man feels when, having
suddenly received a violent blow from behind, he turns round, angry
and eager to avenge himself, to look for his antagonist, and finds
that it is he himself who has accidentally struck himself, that
there is no one to be angry with, and that he must put up with and try
to soothe the pain.
  Never afterward did he feel it with such intensity, but this first
time he could not for a long while get over it. His natural feeling
urged him to defend himself, to prove to her she was wrong; but to
prove her wrong would mean irritating her still more and making the
rupture greater that was the cause of all his suffering. One
habitual feeling impelled him to get rid of the blame and to pass it
on her; another feeling, even stronger, impelled him as quickly as
possible to smooth over the rupture without letting it grow greater.
To remain under such undeserved reproach was wretched, but to make her
suffer by justifying himself was worse still. Like a man half-awake in
an agony of pain, he wanted to tear out, to fling away the seat of
pain, and, coming to his senses, he felt that the seat of pain was
himself. He could do nothing but try to help the seat of pain bear it,
and this he tried to do.
  They made peace. She, recognizing that she was wrong, though she did
not say so, became tenderer to him, and they experienced new,
redoubled happiness in their love. But that did not prevent such
quarrels from happening again, and exceedingly often too, on the
most unexpected and trivial grounds. These quarrels frequently arose
from the fact that they did not yet know what was of importance to
each, and that all this early period they were both often in a bad
temper. When one was in a good temper, and the other in a bad
temper, the peace was not broken; but when both happened to be in an
ill-humor, quarrels sprang up from such incomprehensibly trifling
causes that they could never remember afterward what they had
quarreled about. It is true that when they were both in a good
temper their enjoyment of life was redoubled. But still this first
period of their married life was a difficult time for them.
  During all this early period they had a peculiarly vivid sense of
tension, as it were, a tugging in opposite directions of the chain
by which they were bound. Altogether their honeymoon- that is to
say, the month after their wedding- from which, through tradition,
Levin had expected so much, was not merely not a time of sweetness,
but remained in the memories of both as the bitterest and most
humiliating period in their lives. They both alike tried in later life
to blot out from their memories all the monstrous, shameful
incidents of that morbid period, when both were rarely in a normal
frame of mind, when both were rarely quite themselves.
  It was only in the third month of their married life, after their
return from Moscow, where they had been staying for a month, that
their life began to go more smoothly.
                             XV.

  They had just come back from Moscow, and were glad to be alone. He
was sitting at the writing table in his study, writing. She, wearing
the dark lilac dress she had worn during the first days of their
married life, and put on again today- a dress particularly
remembered and loved by him- was sitting on the sofa, the same
old-fashioned leather sofa which had always stood in the study in
Levin's father's and grandfather's days. She was sewing at broderie
anglaise. He thought and wrote, never losing the happy consciousness
of her presence. His work, both on the land and on the book, in
which the principles of the new land system were to be laid down,
had not been abandoned; but just as formerly his work and ideas had
seemed to him petty and trivial in comparison with the darkness that
overspread all life, now they seemed as unimportant and petty in
comparison with the life that lay before him suffused with the
brilliant light of happiness. He went on with his work, but he felt
now that the center of gravity of his attention had passed to
something else, and that consequently he looked at his work quite
differently and more clearly. Formerly this work had been for him an
escape from life. Formerly he had felt that without this work his life
would be too gloomy. Now this work was necessary for him so that
life might not be too uniformly bright. Taking up his manuscript,
reading through what he had written, he found with pleasure that the
work was worth his working at. Many of his old ideas seemed to him
superfluous and extreme, but many blanks became distinct to him when
he reviewed the whole thing in his memory. He was writing now a new
chapter on the causes of the present disadvantageous condition of
agriculture in Russia. He maintained that the poverty of Russia arises
not merely from the anomalous distribution of landed property and from
misdirected reforms, but that what had contributed of late years to
this result was a civilization from without, abnormally grafted upon
Russia- especially facilities of communication such as railways,
leading to centralization in towns, the development of luxury, and the
consequent development of manufactures, credit, and its
accompaniment of speculation- all to the detriment of agriculture.
It seemed to him that in a normal development of wealth in a state all
these phenomena would arise only when a considerable amount of labor
had been put into agriculture, when it had come under regular, or at
least definite, conditions; that the wealth of a country ought to
increase proportionally, and especially in such a way that other
sources of wealth should not outstrip agriculture; that in harmony
with a certain stage of agriculture there should be means of
communication corresponding to it, and that in our unsettled condition
of the land, railways, called into being by political and not by
economic needs, were premature, and, instead of promoting agriculture,
as was expected of them, they were competing with agriculture and
promoting the development of manufactures and credit, and so arresting
its progress; and that just as the one-sided and premature development
of one organ in an animal would hinder its general development, so
in the general development of wealth in Russia, credit, facilities
of communication, manufacturing activity, indubitably necessary in
Europe, where they had arisen in their proper time, had with us only
done harm, by throwing into the background the chief question, next in
turn, of the organization of agriculture.
  While he was at his writing, she was thinking how unnaturally
cordial her husband had been to young Prince Charsky, who had, with
great want of tact, flirted with her the day before they left
Moscow. "He's jealous," she thought. "My God! How sweet and silly he
is! He's jealous of me! If he only knew that all others are no more to
me than Piotr the cook!" she thought, looking at his head and red neck
with a feeling of possession strange to herself. "Though it's a pity
to take him from his work (but he has plenty of time!), I must look at
his face; will he feel I'm looking at him? I wish he'd turn
round.... I'll will him to!" and she opened her eyes wide, as though
to intensify the influence of her gaze.
  "Yes, they draw away all the sap and give a false resplendence,"
he muttered, stopped writing, and, feeling that she was looking at him
and smiling, he looked round.
  "Well?" he queried, smiling, and getting up.
  "He looked round," she thought.
  "It's nothing; I wanted you to look round," she said, watching
him, and trying to guess whether he was vexed at being interrupted
or not.
  "How happy we are alone together! I am, that is," he said, going
up to her with a radiant smile of happiness.
  "I'm just as happy. I'll never go anywhere, especially not to
Moscow."
  "And what were you thinking about?"
  "I? I was thinking... No, no, go on writing; don't break off," she
said, pursing up her lips, "and I must cut out these little holes now,
do you see?"
  She took up her scissors and began cutting them out.
  "No; tell me- what was it?" he said, sitting down beside her and
watching the circular motion of the tiny scissors.
  "Oh! what was I thinking about? I was thinking about Moscow, about
the nape of your neck."
  "Why should I, of all people, have such happiness! It's unnatural.
Too good," he said kissing her hand.
  "I feel quite the opposite; the better things are, the more
natural it seems to me."
  "And you've got a little curl loose," he said, carefully turning her
head round. "A little curl, oh yes. No, no, we are busy at our work!"
  Work did not progress further, and they darted apart from one
another like culprits when Kouzma came in to announce that tea was
ready.
  "Have they come from town?" Levin asked Kouzma.
  "They've just come; they're unpacking the things."
  "Come quickly," she said to him as she went out of the study, "or
else I shall read the letters without you."
  Left alone, after putting his manuscripts together in the new
portfolio bought by her, he washed his hands at the new washstand with
the new elegant fittings, which had all made their appearance with
her. Levin smiled at his own thoughts, and shook his head
disapprovingly at those thoughts; a feeling akin to remorse fretted
him. There was something shameful, effeminate, Capuan, as he called it
to himself, in his present mode of life. "It's not right to go on like
this," he thought. "It'll soon be three months, and I'm doing next
to nothing. Today, almost for the first time, I set to work seriously-
and what happened? I did nothing but begin and throw it aside. I
have almost given up even my ordinary pursuits. I scarcely walk or
drive about at all to look after things on my land. Either I am
loath to leave her, or I see she's dull alone. And I used to think
that, before marriage, life was nothing much, somehow didn't count,
but that after marriage life began in earnest. And here almost three
months have passed, and I have spent my time so idly and unprofitably.
No, this won't do; I must begin. Of course, it's not her fault.
She's not to blame in any way. I ought to be firmer myself, to
maintain my masculine independence of action; or else I shall get into
such ways, and she'll get used to them too.... Of course she's not
to blame," he told himself.
  But it is hard for anyone who is dissatisfied not to blame someone
else, and especially the person nearest of all to one, for the basis
of one's dissatisfaction. And it vaguely came into Levin's mind that
she herself was not to blame (she could not be to blame for anything),
but what was to blame was her education, too superficial and
frivolous. ("That fool Charsky: I know she wanted to stop him, but
didn't know how to.") "Yes, apart from her interest in the house (that
she has), apart from dress and broderie anglaise, she has no serious
interests. No interest in my work, in the estate, in the peasants, nor
in music, though she's rather good at it, nor in reading. She does
nothing, and is perfectly satisfied." Levin, in his heart, censured
this, and did not as yet understand that she was preparing for that
period of activity which was to come for her when she would at once be
the wife of her husband and mistress of the house, and would bear, and
nurse, and bring up children. He knew not that she was instinctively
aware of this, and preparing herself for this time of terrible toil,
did not reproach herself for the moments of carelessness and happiness
in her love, which she was enjoying now, while gaily building her nest
for the future.
                             XVI.

  When Levin went upstairs, his wife was sitting near the new silver
samovar and the new tea service, and, having settled old Agathya
Mikhailovna at a little table with a full cup of tea, was reading a
letter from Dolly, with whom they were in continual and frequent
correspondence.
  "You see, your lady's settled me here, told me to sit a bit with
her," said Agathya Mikhailovna, smiling amicably at Kitty.
  In these words of Agathya Mikhailovna Levin read the final act of
the drama which had been enacted of late between her and Kitty. He saw
that, in spite of Agathya Mikhailovna's feelings being hurt by a new
mistress taking the reins of government out of her hands, Kitty had
yet conquered her and made her love her.
  "Here, I opened your letter too," said Kitty, handing him an
illiterate letter. "It's from that woman, I think- your
brother's..." she said. "I did not read it through. This is from my
people and from Dolly. Fancy! Dolly took Tania and Grisha to a
children's ball at the Sarmatskys': Tania was a French marquise."
  But Levin did not hear her. Flushing, he took the letter from
Marya Nikolaevna, his brother's former mistress, and began to read it.
This was the second letter he had received from Marya Nikolaevna. In
the first letter, Marya Nikolaevna wrote that his brother had sent her
packing for no fault of hers, and, with touching simplicity, added
that though she was in want again, she asked for nothing, and wished
for nothing, but was only tormented by the thought that Nikolai
Dmitrievich would come to grief without her, owing to the weak state
of his health, and begged his brother to look after him. Now she wrote
quite differently. She had found Nikolai Dmitrievich, had again made
it up with him in Moscow, and had moved with him to a provincial town,
where he had received a post in the government service. But, she
wrote, he had quarreled with the head official, and was on his way
back to Moscow, only he had been taken so ill on the road that it
was doubtful if he would ever leave his bed again. "It's always of you
he has talked, and, besides he has no more money left."
  "Read this; Dolly writes about you," Kitty was beginning, with a
smile; but she stopped suddenly, noticing the changed expression on
her husband's face. "What is it? What's the matter?"
  "She writes to me that Nikolai, my brother, is at death's door. I
shall go to him."
  Kitty's face changed at once. Thoughts of Tania as a marquise, of
Dolly, all had vanished.
  "When are you going?" she said.
  "Tomorrow."
  "And I will go with you- may I?" she said.
  "Kitty! What are you thinking of?" he said reproachfully.
  "What am I thinking of?" offended that he should seem to take her
suggestion unwillingly and with vexation.
  "Why shouldn't I go? I shan't be in your way. I..."
  "I'm going because my brother is dying," said Levin. "Why should
you..."
  "Why? For the same reason as you."
  "And, at a moment of such gravity for me, she only thinks of her
being dull by herself," thought Levin. And this subterfuge in a matter
of such gravity infuriated him.
  "It's out of the question," he said sternly.
  Agathya Mikhailovna, seeing that it was coming to a quarrel,
gently put down her cup and withdrew. Kitty did not even notice her.
The tone in which her husband had said the last words offended her,
especially because he evidently did not believe what she had said.
  "I tell you, that if you go, I shall come with you; I shall
certainly come," she said hastily and wrathfully. "Why out of the
question? Why do you say it's out of the question?"
  "Because it'll be going God knows where, by all sorts of roads and
to all sorts of hotels.... You would be a hindrance to me," said
Levin, trying to be cool.
  "Not at all. I don't want anything. Where you can go, I can..."
  "Well, for one thing then, because this woman's there whom you can't
meet."
  "I don't know and don't care to know who's there and what. I know
that my husband's brother is dying, and my husband is going to him,
and I go with my husband so that..."
  "Kitty! Don't get angry. But just think a little: this is a matter
of such importance that I can't bear to think that you should bring in
a feeling of weakness, of dislike to being left alone. Come, you'll be
dull alone, so go and stay at Moscow a little."
  "There, you always ascribe base, vile motives to me," she said
with tears of wrath and wounded pride. "I didn't mean anything- it
wasn't weakness, it wasn't anything.... I feel that it's my duty to be
with my husband when he's in trouble, but you try on purpose to hurt
me, you try on purpose not to understand...."
  "No; this is awful! To be such a slave!" cried Levin, getting up,
and unable to restrain his vexation any longer. But at the same second
he felt that he was beating himself.
  "Then why did you marry? You could have been free. Why did you, if
you regret it?" she said, getting up and running away into the drawing
room.
  When he went to her, she was sobbing.
  He began to speak, trying to find words not to dissuade but simply
to soothe her. But she did not heed him, and would not agree to
anything. He bent down to her and took her hand, which resisted him.
He kissed her hand, kissed her hair, kissed her hand again- still
she was silent. But when he took her face in both his hands, and
said "Kitty!" she suddenly collected herself, still shed some tears,
and they were reconciled.
  It was decided that they should go together the next day. Levin told
his wife that he believed she wanted to go simply in order to be of
use, agreed that Marya Nikolaevna's being with his brother did not
make her going improper, but he set off dissatisfied, at the bottom of
his heart, both with her and with himself. He was dissatisfied with
her for being unable to make up her mind to let him go when it was
necessary (and how strange it was for him to think that he, so
lately hardly daring to believe in such happiness as the possibility
of her loving him- now was unhappy because she loved him too much!),
and he was dissatisfied with himself for not showing more strength
of will. Even greater was the feeling of disagreement at the bottom of
his heart as to her not needing to consider the woman who was with his
brother, and he thought with horror of all the contingencies they
might meet with. The mere idea of his wife, his Kitty, being in the
same room with a common wench, set him shuddering with horror and
loathing.
                             XVII.

  The hotel of the provincial town where Nikolai Levin was lying ill
was one of those provincial hotels which are constructed on the newest
model of modern improvements, with the best intentions of cleanliness,
comfort, and even elegance, but, owing to the public that patronizes
them, are with astounding rapidity transformed into filthy taverns
with a pretension of modern improvement and made by the very
pretension worse than the old-fashioned, honestly filthy hotels.
This hotel had already reached that stage, and the soldier in a filthy
uniform smoking in the entry, supposed to stand for a hall porter, and
the cast-iron, perforated, somber and disagreeable staircase, and
the free and easy waiter in a filthy dress coat, and the common dining
room with a dusty bouquet of wax flowers adorning the table, and
filth, dust and disorder everywhere, and, at the same time, the sort
of modern, up-to-date, self-complacent, railway uneasiness of this
hotel, aroused a most painful feeling in Levin after their fresh young
life, especially because the impression of falsity made by the hotel
was so out of keeping with what awaited them.
  As is invariably the case, after they had been asked at what price
they wanted rooms, it appeared that there was not one decent room
for them; one decent room had been taken by the inspector of
railroads, another by a lawyer from Moscow, a third by Princess
Astafieva just arrived from the country. There remained only one
filthy room, next to which they promised that another should be
empty by the evening. Feeling angry with his wife because what he
had expected had come to pass- that at the moment of arrival, when his
heart throbbed with emotion and anxiety to know how his brother was
getting on, he should have to be seeing after her, instead of
rushing straight to his brother- Levin conducted her to the room
assigned them.
  "Go, do go!" she said, looking at him with timid and guilty eyes.
  He went out of the door without a word, and at once stumbled over
Marya Nikolaevna, who had heard of his arrival and had not dared to go
in to see him. She was just the same as when he had seen her in
Moscow; the same woolen gown, and bare arms and neck, and the same
good-naturedly stupid, pock-marked face, only a little plumper.
  "Well, how is he? How is he?"
  "Very bad. He can't get up. He has been expecting you all this
while. He... Are you... with your wife?"
  Levin did not for the first moment understand what confused her, but
she immediately enlightened him.
  "I'll go away. I'll go down to the kitchen," she brought out.
"Nikolai Dmitrievich will be delighted. He heard about it, and knows
her, and remembers her abroad."
  Levin realized that she meant his wife, and did not know what answer
to make.
  "Come along, come along to him!" he said.
  But, as soon as he moved, the door of his room opened and Kitty
peeped out. Levin crimsoned both from shame and anger at his wife, who
had put herself and him in such a difficult position; but Marya
Nikolaevna crimsoned still more. She positively shrank together and
flushed to the point of tears, and, clutching the ends of her shawl in
both hands, twisted them in her red fingers without knowing what to
say and what to do.
  For the first instant Levin saw an expression of eager curiosity
in the eyes with which Kitty looked at this incomprehensible to her,
awful woman; but it lasted only a single instant.
  "Well! How is he?" she turned to her husband and then to her.
  "But one can't go on talking in the passage like this!" Levin
said, looking angrily at a gentleman who walked jauntily at that
instant across the corridor, as though about his affairs.
  "Well then, come in," said Kitty, turning to Marya Nikolaevna, who
had recovered herself- but, noticing her husband's face of dismay- "or
go on; go, and then come for me," she said, and went back into the
room. Levin went to his brother's room.
  He had not in the least expected what he saw and felt in his
brother's room. He had expected to find him in the same state of
self-deception which he had heard was so frequent with the
consumptive, and which had struck him so much during his brother's
visit in the autumn. He had expected to find the physical signs of the
approach of death more marked- greater weakness, greater emaciation,
but still almost the same condition of things. He had expected himself
to feel the same distress at the loss of the brother he loved and
the same horror in face of death as he had felt then, only in a
greater degree. And he had prepared himself for this; but he found
something utterly different.
  In a little dirty room with the painted panels of its walls filthy
with spittle; with conversation audible from the next room through the
thin partition, in a stifling atmosphere saturated with impurities, on
a bedstead moved away from the wall, there lay, covered with a
quilt, a body. One arm of this body was above the quilt, and the
wrist, huge as a rake handle, was attached, inconceivably it seemed,
to the thin, long bobbin smooth from the beginning to the middle.
The head lay sideways on the pillow. Levin could see the scanty
locks wet with sweat on the temples and the tensed, seemingly
transparent forehead.
  "It cannot be that that fearful body was my brother Nikolai?"
thought Levin. But he went closer, saw the face, and doubt became
impossible. In spite of the terrible change in the face, Levin had
only to glance at those eager eyes at his approach, only to catch
the faint movement of the mouth under the sticky mustache, to
realize the terrible truth that this dead body was his living brother.
  The glittering eyes looked sternly and reproachfully at the
brother as he drew near. And immediately this glance established a
living relationship between living men. Levin immediately felt the
reproach in the eyes fixed on him, and felt remorse at his own
happiness.
  When Konstantin took him by the hand, Nikolai smiled. The smile
was faint, scarcely perceptible, and in spite of the smile the stern
expression of the eyes was unchanged.
  "You did not expect to find me like this," he articulated with
effort.
  "Yes... no," said Levin, hesitating over his words. "How was it
you didn't let me know before- that is, at the time of my wedding? I
made inquiries in all directions."
  He had to talk so as not to be silent, and he did not know what to
say, especially as his brother made no reply, and simply stared
without dropping his eyes, and apparently penetrated to the inner
meaning of each word. Levin told his brother that his wife had come
with him. Nikolai expressed pleasure, but said he was afraid of
frightening her by his condition. A silence followed. Suddenly Nikolai
stirred, and began to say something. Levin expected something of
peculiar gravity and importance from the expression of his face, but
Nikolai began speaking of his health. He found fault with the
doctor, regretting he had not a celebrated Moscow doctor. Levin saw
that he still had hopes.
  Seizing the first moment of silence, Levin got up, anxious to
escape, if only for an instant, from his agonizing emotion, and said
that he would go and fetch his wife.
  "Very well, and I'll tell Masha to tidy up here. It's dirty and
stinking here, I expect. Masha! Clear up the room," the sick man
said with effort. "And when you've cleared up, you go away," he added,
looking inquiringly at his brother.
  Levin made no answer. Going out into the corridor, he stopped short.
He had said he would fetch his wife, but now, taking stock of the
emotion he was feeling, he decided that, on the contrary, he would try
to persuade her not to go in to the sick man. "Why should she suffer
as I am suffering?" he thought.
  "Well, how is he?" Kitty asked with a frightened face.
  "Oh, it's awful, it's awful! What did you come for?" said Levin.
  Kitty was silent for a few seconds, looking timidly and ruefully
at her husband; then she went up and took him by the elbow with both
hands.
  "Kostia! Take me to him; it will be easier for us to bear it
together. Only take me, take me to him, please, and go away," she
said. "You must understand that for me to see you, and not to see him,
is far more painful. There I might be a help to you and to him.
Please, let me!" she besought her husband, as though the happiness
of her life depended on it.
  Levin was obliged to agree, and, regaining his composure, and
completely forgetting about Marya Nikolaevna by now, he went again
in to his brother with Kitty.
  Stepping lightly, and continually glancing at her husband, showing
him a valorous and sympathetic face, Kitty went into the sickroom,
and, turning without haste, noiselessly closed the door. With
inaudible steps she went quickly to the sick man's bedside, and
going up so that he would not have to turn his head, she immediately
clasped in her fresh young hand the skeleton of his huge hand, pressed
it, and began speaking with that soft eagerness, sympathetic and
inoffensive, which is peculiar merely to women.
  "We have met, though we were not acquainted, at Soden," she said.
"You never thought I was to be your sister."
  "You would not have recognized me?" he said, with a smile which
had become radiant at her entrance.
  "Yes, I should. What a good thing you let us know! Not a day has
passed that Kostia has not mentioned you, and been anxious."
  But the sick man's interest did not last long.
  Before she had finished speaking, there had come back into his
face the stern, reproachful expression of the dying man's envy of
the living.
  "I am afraid you are not quite comfortable here," she said,
turning away from his fixed stare, and looking about the room. "We
must ask about another room," she said to her husband, "so that we
might be nearer."
                             XVIII.

  Levin could not look calmly at his brother; he could not himself
be natural and calm in his presence. When he went in to the sick
man, his eyes and his attention were unconsciously dimmed, and he
did not see and did not distinguish the details of his brother's
position. He smelt the awful odor, saw the dirt, disorder, and
miserable condition, and heard the groans, and felt that nothing could
be done to help. It never entered his head to analyze the details of
the sick man's situation, to consider how that body was lying under
the quilt, how those emaciated legs and thighs and spine were lying
huddled up, and whether they could not be made more comfortable,
whether anything could not be done to make things, if not better, at
least not so bad. It made his blood run cold when he began to think of
all these details. He was absolutely convinced that nothing could be
done to prolong his brother's life or to relieve his suffering. But
a consciousness of Levin's regarding all aid as out of the question
was felt by the sick man, and exasperated him. And this made it
still more painful for Levin. To be in the sickroom was agony to
him, not to be there was still worse. And he was continually, on
various pretexts, going out of the room, and coming in again,
because he was unable to remain alone.
  But Kitty thought, and felt, and acted quite differently. On
seeing the sick man she pitied him. And pity in her womanly heart
did not arouse at all that feeling of horror and loathing that it
aroused in her husband, but a desire to act, to find out all the
details of his state, and to remedy them. And since she had not the
slightest doubt that it was her duty to help him, she had no doubt
either that it was possible, and immediately set to work. The very
details, the mere thought of which reduced her husband to terror,
immediately engaged her attention. She sent for the doctor, sent to
the chemist's, set the maid who had come with her and Marya Nikolaevna
to sweep and dust and scrub; she herself washed up something, washed
out something else, laid something under the quilt. Something was by
her direction brought into the sickroom, something else was carried
out. She herself went several times to her room, regardless of the men
she met in the corridor, got out and brought in sheets, pillowcases,
towels, and shirts.
  The waiter, who was busy with a party of engineers dining in the
dining hall, came several times with an irate countenance in answer to
her summons, and could not avoid carrying out her orders, as she
gave them with such gracious insistence that there was no evading her.
Levin did not approve of all this; he did not believe it would be of
any good to the patient. Above all, he was afraid the patient would be
angry at it. But the sick man, though he seemed to be indifferent
about it, was not angry, but only abashed and on the whole seemed
interested in what she was doing with him. Coming back from the doctor
to whom Kitty had sent him, Levin, on opening the door, came upon
the sick man at the instant when, by Kitty's direction, they were
changing his linen. The long white ridge of his spine, with the
huge, prominent shoulder blades and jutting ribs and vertebrae, was
bare, and Marya Nikolaevna and the waiter were struggling with the
sleeve of the nightshirt, and could not get the long, limp arm into
it. Kitty, hurriedly closing the door after Levin, did not look in
that direction, but the sick man groaned, and she moved rapidly toward
him.
  "Come, a little quicker," she said.
  "Oh, don't you come," said the sick man angrily. "I'll do it
myself...."
  "What did you say?" queried Marya Nikolaevna.
  But Kitty heard and saw he was ashamed and uncomfortable at being
naked before her.
  "I'm not looking, I'm not looking!" she said, putting the arm in.
"Marya Nikolaevna, you come this side- you do it," she added.
  "Please, run over for me, there's a little bottle in my small
bag," she said, turning to her husband, "you know, in the side pocket;
bring it, please, and meanwhile they'll finish clearing up here."
  Returning with the bottle, Levin found the sick man settled
comfortably and everything about him completely changed. The heavy
smell was replaced by the smell of aromatic vinegar, which Kitty
with pouting lips and puffed-out, rosy cheeks was squirting through
a small tube. There was no dust visible anywhere; a rug was laid by
the bedside. On the table stood medicine bottles and decanters
tidily arranged, and the linen needed was folded up there, and Kitty's
broderie anglaise. On the other table by the patient's bed there
were candles, and drink, and powders. The sick man himself, washed and
combed, lay in clean sheets on high raised pillows, in a clean
nightshirt with a white collar about his astoundingly thin neck,
and, with a new expression of hope, was looking fixedly at Kitty.
  The doctor brought by Levin, and found by him at the club, was not
the one who had been attending Nikolai Levin, and whom he disliked.
The new doctor took up a stethoscope and sounded the patient, shook
his head, prescribed medicine, and with extreme minuteness explained
first how to take the medicine and then what diet was to be adhered
to. He advised eggs, raw or hardly cooked, and Seltzer water, with new
milk at a certain temperature. When the doctor had gone away the
sick man said something to his brother, of which Levin could
distinguish only the last words: "Your Katia." By the expression
with which he gazed at her, Levin saw that he was praising her. He
beckoned to him Katia, as he called her.
  "I'm much better already," he said. "Why, with you I should have got
well long ago. How fine everything is!" He took her hand and drew it
toward his lips, but, as though afraid she would dislike it, he
changed his mind, let it go, and only stroked it. Kitty took his
hand in both of hers and squeezed it.
  "Now turn me over on the left side and go to bed," he said.
  No one could make out what he said but Kitty; she alone
understood. She understood because she was all the while mentally
keeping watch on what he needed.
  "On the other side," she said to her husband, "he always sleeps on
that side. Turn him over- it's so disagreeable calling the servants.
I'm not strong enough. Can you?" she said to Marya Nikolaevna.
  "I'm afraid...." answered Marya Nikolaevna.
  Terrible as it was to Levin to put his arms round that terrible
body, to take hold, under the quilt, of that of which he preferred
to know nothing, under his wife's influence he made his resolute
face that she knew so well, and, putting his arms into the bed took
hold of the body, but in spite of his own strength, he was struck by
the strange heaviness of those powerless limbs. While he was turning
him over, conscious of the huge emaciated arm about his neck, Kitty
swiftly and noiselessly turned the pillow, beat it up, and settled
in it the sick man's head, smoothing back his hair, which was sticking
again to his moist brow.
  The sick man kept his brother's hand in his own. Levin felt that
he meant to do something with his hand and was pulling it somewhere.
Levin yielded with a sinking heart: yes, he drew it to his mouth and
kissed it. Levin, shaking with sobs and unable to articulate a word,
went out of the room.
                             XIX.

  "Thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast
revealed them unto babes." So Levin thought about his wife as he
talked to her that evening.
  Levin thought of the text, not because he considered himself "wise
and prudent." He did not consider himself wise and prudent, but he
could not help knowing that he had more intellect than his wife and
Agathya Mikhailovna, and he could not help knowing that when he
thought of death, he thought with all the force of his intellect. He
knew too that the brains of many great men, whose thoughts he had
read, had brooded over death and yet knew not a hundredth part of what
his wife and Agathya Mikhailovna knew about it. Different as those two
women were, Agathya Mikhailovna and Katia, as his brother Nikolai
had called her, and as Levin particularly liked to call her now,
they were quite alike in this. Both knew, without a shade of doubt,
what sort of thing life was, and what was death, and though neither of
them could have answered, and would not even have understood the
questions that presented themselves to Levin, both had no doubt of the
significance of this event, and were precisely alike in their way of
looking at it, which they shared with millions of people. The proof
that they knew for a certainty the nature of death lay in the fact
that they knew without a second of hesitation how to deal with the
dying, and were not frightened by them. Levin, and other men like him,
though they could have said a great deal about death, obviously did
not know this since they were afraid of death, and were absolutely
at a loss what to do when people were dying. If Levin had been alone
now with his brother Nikolai, he would have looked at him with terror,
and with still greater terror waited, and would not have known what
else to do.
  More than that, he did not know what to say, how to look, how to
move. To talk of outside things seemed to him shocking, impossible; to
talk of death and depressing subjects- also impossible. To be silent
was also impossible. "If I look at him he will think I am studying
him, I am afraid of him; if I don't look at him, he'll think I'm
thinking of other things. If I walk on tiptoe, he will be vexed; to
tread firmly, I'm ashamed." Kitty evidently did not think of
herself, and had no time to think about herself: she was thinking
about him because she knew something, and all went well. She even told
him about herself and about her wedding, and smiled and sympathized
with him, and petted him, and talked of cases of recovery, and all
went well; therefore, she must know. The proof that her behavior and
Agathya Mikhailovna's was not instinctive, animal, irrational, lay
in that apart from the physical treatment, the relief of suffering,
both Agathya Mikhailovna and Kitty required for the dying man
something else more important than the physical treatment, and
something which had nothing in common with physical conditions.
Agathya Mikhailovna, speaking of a man recently dead, had said: "Well,
thank God, he took the sacrament and received Extreme Unction; God
grant each one of us such a death." Katia, in just the same way,
besides all her care about linen, bedsores, drink, found time the very
first day to persuade the sick man of the necessity of taking the
sacrament and receiving Extreme Unction.
  On getting back from the sickroom to their own two rooms for the
night, Levin sat with hanging head, not knowing what to do. To say
nothing of supper, of preparing for bed, of considering what they were
going to do, he could not even talk to his wife; he was ashamed to.
Kitty, on the contrary, was more active than usual. She was even
livelier than usual. She ordered supper to be brought, herself
unpacked their things, and herself helped to make the beds, and did
not even forget to sprinkle them with Persian insecticide. She
showed that alertness, that swiftness of reflection which comes out in
men before a battle, in conflict, in the dangerous and decisive
moments of life- those moments when a man shows once and for all his
value, and that all his past has not been wasted but has been a
preparation for these moments.
  Everything went rapidly in her hands, and before it was twelve
o'clock all their things were arranged tidily and orderly in such a
way that the hotel rooms seemed like home, like her rooms: the beds
were made, brushes, combs, looking glasses were put out, table napkins
were spread.
  Levin felt that it was unpardonable to eat, to sleep, to talk even
now, and it seemed to him that every movement he made was unseemly.
She arranged the brushes, but she did it all so that there was nothing
shocking in it.
  They could neither of them eat, however, and for a long while they
could not sleep, and did not even go to bed.
  "I am very glad I persuaded him to receive Extreme Unction
tomorrow," she said, sitting in her dressing jacket before her folding
looking glass, combing her soft, fragrant hair with a small-toothed
comb. "I have never seen it, but I know, mamma has told me, there
are prayers said for recovery."
  "Do you suppose he can possibly recover?" said Levin, watching a
slender tress at the back of her round little head that was
continually hidden when she passed the comb through the front.
  "I asked the doctor; he said he couldn't live more than three
days. But can they be sure? I'm very glad, anyway, that I persuaded
him," she said, looking askance at her husband through her hair.
"Anything is possible," she added with that peculiar, rather sly
expression that was always in her face when she spoke of religion.
  Since their conversation about religion during their engagement
neither of them had ever started a discussion of the subject, but
she performed all the ceremonies of going to church, saying her
prayers, and so on, always with the unvarying conviction that this
ought to be so. In spite of his assertion to the contrary, she was
firmly persuaded that he was as much a Christian as she, and indeed
a far better one; and all that he said about it was simply one of
his absurd masculine freaks, just as he would say about her broderie
anglaise- that good people patch holes but that she cut them out on
purpose, and so on.
  "Yes, you see this woman, Marya Nikolaevna, did not know how to
manage all this," said Levin. "And... I must own I'm very, very glad
you came. You are such purity that..." He took her hand and did not
kiss it (to kiss her hand in such closeness to death seemed to him
improper); he merely squeezed it with a penitent air, looking at her
brightening eyes.
  "It would have been miserable for you to be alone," she said, and
lifting her hands which hid her cheeks, flushing with pleasure,
twisted her coil of hair on the nape of her neck and pinned it
there. "No," she went on, "she did not know how.... Luckily, I learned
lot at Soden."
  "Surely there are no people there so ill?"
  "Worse."
  "What's so awful to me is that I can't but see him as he was when he
was young. You would not believe how charming he was as a youth, but I
did not understand him then."
  "I can quite, quite believe it. How I feel that we might have been
friends!" she said; and, distressed at what she had said, she looked
round at her husband, and tears came into her eyes.
  "Yes, might have been," he said mournfully. "He's just one of
those people of whom they say that they are not for this world."
  "But we have many days before us; we must go to bed," said Kitty,
glancing at her tiny watch.
                             XX.

                            DEATH.

  The next day the sick man received the sacrament and Extreme
Unction. During the ceremony Nikolai Levin prayed fervently. His great
eyes fastened on the holy icon that was set out on a card table
covered with a colored napkin, expressed such passionate prayer and
hope that it was awful to Levin to see it. Levin knew that this
passionate prayer and hope would only make him feel more bitterly
the parting from the life he so loved. Levin knew his brother and
the workings of his intellect: he knew that his unbelief came not from
life being easier for him without faith, but had grown up because,
step by step, the contemporary scientific interpretation of natural
phenomena crushed out the possibility of faith; and so he knew that
his present return was not a legitimate one, brought about by way of
the same working of his intellect, but simply a temporary,
interested return to faith in a desperate hope of recovery. Levin knew
too that Kitty had strengthened his hope by accounts of the
marvelous recoveries she had heard of Levin knew all this; and it
was agonizingly painful to him to behold the supplicating, hopeful
eyes and the emaciated wrist, lifted with difficulty, making the
sign of the cross on the tense brow, and the prominent shoulders and
hollow, gasping chest, which one could not feel consistent with the
life the sick man was praying for. During the sacrament Levin
offered prayers, and did what he, an unbeliever, had done a thousand
times. He said, addressing God: "If Thou dost exist, make this man
recover" (of course this same thing has been repeated many times),
"and Thou wilt save him and me."
  After Extreme Unction the sick man became suddenly much better. He
did not cough once in the course of an hour, smiled, kissed Kitty's
hand, thanking her with tears, and said he was comfortable, free
from pain, and that he felt strong and had an appetite. He even raised
himself when his soup was brought, and asked for a cutlet as well.
Hopelessly ill as he was, obvious as it was at the first glance that
he could not recover, Levin and Kitty were for that hour both in the
same state of excitement, happy, though fearful of being mistaken.
  "Is he better?"- "Yes, much."- "It's wonderful."- "There's nothing
wonderful in it."- "Anyway, he's better,"- they said in a whisper,
smiling to one another.
  This self-deception was not of long duration. The sick man fell into
a quiet sleep, but he was waked up half an hour later by his cough.
And all at once every hope vanished in those about him and in himself.
The reality of his suffering crushed all hopes in Levin and Kitty, and
in the sick man himself, leaving no doubt, no memory even of past
hopes.
  Without referring to what he had believed in half an hour before, as
though ashamed even to recall it, he asked for iodine to inhale in a
bottle covered with perforated paper. Levin gave him the bottle, and
the same look of passionate hope with which he had taken the sacrament
was now fastened on his brother, demanding from him the confirmation
of the doctor's words that inhaling iodine worked wonders.
  "Isn't Katia here?" he gasped, looking round while Levin reluctantly
assented to the doctor's words. "No- then I can say it.... It was
for her sake I went through that farce. She's so sweet; but you and
I can't deceive ourselves. This is what I believe in," he said, and,
squeezing the bottle in his bony hand, he began breathing over it.
  At eight o'clock in the evening Levin and his wife were drinking tea
in their room, when Marya Nikolaevna ran in to them breathlessly.
She was pale, and her lips were quivering.- "He is dying!" she
whispered. "I'm afraid he will die right away."
  Both of them ran to him. He was sitting raised up, with one elbow on
the bed, his long back bent, and his head hanging low.
  "How do you feel?" Levin asked in a whisper, after a silence.
  "I feel I'm setting off," Nikolai said with difficulty, but with
extreme distinctness, deliberately squeezing the words out of himself.
He did not raise his head, but simply turned his eyes upward,
without their reaching his brother's face. "Katia, go away!" he added.
  Levin jumped up, and with a peremptory whisper made her go out.
  "I'm setting off," he said again.
  "Why do you think so?" said Levin, so as to say something.
  "Because I'm setting off," he repeated, as though he had a liking
for the phrase. "It's the end."
  Marya Nikolaevna went up to him.
  "You had better lie down; you'd be easier," she said.
  "I shall lie down soon enough," he pronounced slowly, "when I'm
dead," he said sarcastically, wrathfully. "Well, you can put me down
if you like."
  Levin laid his brother on his back, sat down beside him, and gazed
at his face, holding his breath. The dying man lay with closed eyes,
but the muscles twitched from time to time on his forehead, as with
one thinking deeply and intensely. Levin involuntarily thought with
him of what it was that was happening to him now, but in spite of
all his mental efforts to keep him company, he saw by the expression
of that calm, stern face, and by the playing muscle above his brow,
that for the dying man there was growing clearer and clearer all
that was still as dark as ever for Levin.
  "Yes, yes, so," the dying man articulated slowly at intervals. "Wait
a little." He was silent again. "Right!" he pronounced all at once
reassuringly, as though all were solved for him. "O Lord!" he
murmured, and sighed deeply.
  Marya Nikolaevna felt his feet. "They're getting cold," she
whispered.

  For a long while, a very long while, it seemed to Levin, the sick
man lay motionless. But he was still alive, and from time to time he
sighed. Levin by now was exhausted from mental strain. He felt that
with no mental effort could he understand what it was that was
right. He felt that he could not follow the dying man's thinking. He
could not even think of the problem of death itself, but, with no will
of his own, thoughts kept coming to him of what he had to do next-
closing the dead man's eyes, dressing him, ordering the coffin. And,
strange to say, he felt utterly cold, and was not conscious of
sorrow nor of loss, less still of pity for his brother. If he had
any feeling for his brother at that moment, it was rather envy for the
knowledge the dying man had now, which he could not have.
  A long time more he sat over him so, continually expecting the
end. But the end did not come. The door opened and Kitty appeared.
Levin got up to stop her. But at the moment he was getting up, he
caught the sound of the dying man stirring.
  "Don't go away," said Nikolai and held out his hand. Levin gave
him his, and angrily waved to his wife to go away.
  With the dying man's hand in his hand, he sat for half an hour, an
hour, another hour. He did not think of death at all now. He
wondered what Kitty was doing; who lived in the next room; whether the
doctor lived in a house of his own. He longed for food and for
sleep. He cautiously drew away his hand and felt the feet. The feet
were cold, but the sick man was still breathing. Levin tried once more
to move away on tiptoe, but the sick man stirred again and said:
"Don't go."

  The dawn came; the sick man's condition was unchanged. Levin
stealthily withdrew his hand, and, without looking at the dying man,
went off to his own room and went to sleep. When he woke up, instead
of news of his brother's death which he expected, he learned that
the sick man had returned to his earlier condition. He had begun
sitting up again, coughing, had begun eating again, talking again, and
again had ceased to talk of death, again had begun to express hope
of his recovery, and had become more irritable and gloomier than ever.
No one, neither his brother nor Kitty, could soothe him. He was
angry with everyone, and said nasty things to everyone, reproached
everyone for his sufferings, and insisted that they should get him a
celebrated doctor from Moscow. To all inquiries made of him as to
how he felt, he made the same answer with an expression of
vindictive reproachfulness: "I'm suffering horribly, intolerably!" The
sick man was suffering more and more, especially from bedsores,
which it was impossible now to remedy, and grew more and more angry
with everyone about him, blaming them for everything, and especially
for not having brought him a doctor from Moscow. Kitty tried in
every possible way to relieve him, to soothe him; but it was all in
vain, and Levin saw that she herself was exhausted both physically and
morally, though she would not admit it. The sense of death, which
had been evoked in all by his taking leave of life on the night when
he had sent for his brother, was broken up. Everyone knew that he must
inevitably die soon, that he was half-dead already. Everyone wished
for nothing but that he should die as soon as possible, and
everyone, concealing this, gave him medicines, tried to find
remedies and doctors, and deceived him, and themselves, and one
another. All this was falsehood, disgusting, irreverent deceit. And
owing to the bent of his character, and because he loved the dying man
more than anyone else did, Levin was most painfully conscious of
this deceit.
  Levin, who had long been possessed by the idea of reconciling his
brothers, at least in face of death, had written to his brother,
Sergei Ivanovich, and having received an answer from him, he read this
letter to the sick man. Sergei Ivanovich wrote that he could not
come himself, and in touching terms he begged his brother's
forgiveness.
  The sick man said nothing.
  "What am I to write to him?" said Levin. "I hope you are not angry
with him?"
  "No, not in the least!" Nikolai answered, vexed at the question.
"Tell him to send me a doctor."
  Three more days of agony followed; the sick man was still in the
same condition. The sense of longing for his death was felt by
everyone now who saw him: by the waiters, and the hotelkeeper, and all
the people staying in the hotel, and the doctor, and Marya Nikolaevna,
and Levin, and Kitty. The sick man alone did not express this feeling,
but on the contrary was furious at their not getting him doctors,
and went on taking medicine and talking of life. Only at rare moments,
when the opium gave him an instant's relief from his never-ceasing
pain, he would sometimes, half-asleep, utter what was ever more
intense in his heart than in all the others: "Oh, if it were only
the end!" or, "When will it be over?"
  His sufferings, steadily growing more intense, did their work and
prepared him for death. There was no position in which he was not in
pain, there was not a minute in which he was unconscious of it, not
a limb, not a part of his body that did not ache and cause him
agony. Even the memories, the impressions, the thoughts of this body
awakened in him now the same aversion as the body itself. The sight of
other people, their remarks, his own reminiscences- everything was for
him a source of agony. Those about him felt this, and instinctively
did not allow themselves to move freely, to talk, to express their
wishes before him. All his life was merged in the one feeling of
suffering and desire to be rid of it.
  There was evidently coming over him that revulsion which would
make him look upon death as the goal of his desires, as happiness.
Hitherto each individual desire, aroused by suffering or privation,
such as hunger, fatigue, thirst, had been satisfied by some bodily
function giving pleasure. But now no physical craving or suffering
received relief, and the effort to relieve them only caused fresh
suffering. And so all desires were merged in one- the desire to be rid
of all his sufferings and their source, the body. But he had no
words to express this desire of deliverance, and so he did not speak
of it, and from habit asked for the satisfaction of desires which
could not now be satisfied. "Turn me over on the other side," he would
say, and immediately after he would ask to be turned back again as
before. "Give me some broth. Take away the broth. Talk of something:
why are you silent?" And directly they began to talk he would close
his eyes, and would show weariness, indifference, and loathing.
  On the tenth day from their arrival in the town, Kitty was unwell.
She suffered from headache and sickness, and she could not get up
all the morning.
  The doctor opined that the indisposition arose from fatigue and
excitement, and prescribed rest.
  After dinner, however, Kitty got up and went as with her work to the
sick man. He looked at her sternly when she came in, and smiled
contemptuously when she said she had been unwell. That day he was
continually blowing his nose, and groaning piteously.
  "How do you feel?" she asked him.
  "Worse," he articulated with difficulty. "In pain!"
  "In pain, where?"
  "Everywhere."
  "It will be over today, you will see," said Marya Nikolaevna. Though
it was said in a whisper, the sick man, whose hearing Levin had
noticed was very keen, must have heard. Levin said "Hush!" to her, and
looked round at the sick man. Nikolai had heard; but these words
produced no effect on him. His eyes had still the same intense,
reproachful look.
  "Why do you think so?" Levin asked her, when she had followed him
into the corridor.
  "He has begun picking at himself," said Marya Nikolaevna.
  "How do you mean?"
  "Like this," she said, tugging at the folds of her woolen skirt.
Levin noticed, indeed, that all that day the patient pulled at
himself, as it were, trying to snatch something away.
  Marya Nikolaevna's prediction came true. Toward night the sick man
was not able to lift his hands, and could only gaze before him with
the same intensely concentrated expression in his eyes. Even when
his brother or Kitty bent over him, so that he could see them, he
looked just the same. Kitty sent for the priest to read the prayer for
the dying.
  While the priest was reading it, the dying man did not show any sign
of life; his eyes were closed. Levin, Kitty and Marya Nikolaevna stood
at the bedside. The priest had not quite finished reading the prayer
when the dying man stretched, sighed, and opened his eyes. The priest,
on finishing the prayer, put the cross to the cold forehead, then
slowly returned it to the stand, and, after standing in silence for
two minutes more, he touched the huge, bloodless hand that was turning
cold.
  "He is gone," said the priest, and would have moved away; but
suddenly there was a faint stir in the mustaches of the dead man, that
seemed glued together, and quite distinctly in the hush they heard
from the bottom of the chest the sharply defined sounds:
  "Not quite.... Soon."
  And a minute later the face brightened, a smile came out under the
mustaches, and the women who had gathered round began carefully laying
out the corpse.
  The sight of his brother, and the nearness of death, revived in
Levin that sense of horror in the face of the insolvable enigma,
together with the nearness and inevitability of death, that had come
upon him that autumn evening when his brother had come to him. This
feeling was now even stronger than before; even less than before did
he feel capable of apprehending the meaning of death, and its
inevitability rose up before him more terrible than ever. But now,
thanks to his wife's presence, that feeling did not reduce him to
despair. In spite of death, he felt the need of life and love. He felt
that love saved him from despair, and that his love, under the
menace of despair, had become still stronger and purer.
  The one mystery of death, still unsolved, had scarcely passed before
his eyes, when another mystery had arisen, as insoluble, urging him to
love and to life.
  The doctor confirmed his former suppositions in regard to Kitty. Her
indisposition consisted of pregnancy.
                             XXI.

  From the moment when Alexei Alexandrovich understood from his
interviews with Betsy and with Stepan Arkadyevich that all that was
expected of him was to leave his wife in peace, without burdening
her with his presence, and that his wife herself desired this, he felt
so distraught that he could come to no decision by himself; he did not
know himself what he wanted now, and, putting himself in the hands
of those who were so pleased to interest themselves in his affairs, he
met everything with unqualified assent. It was only when Anna had left
his house, and the English governess sent to ask him whether she
should dine with him or separately, that for the first time he clearly
comprehended his position, and was appalled by it.
  Most difficult of all in this position was the fact that he could
not in any way connect and reconcile his past with the present. It was
not the past when he had lived happily with his wife that troubled
him. The transition from that past to a knowledge of his wife's
unfaithfulness he had already lived through miserably; that state
had been painful, but he could understand it. If his wife had then, on
declaring to him her unfaithfulness, left him, he would have been
wounded, unhappy, but he would not have been in the hopeless position-
incomprehensible to himself- in which he felt himself now. He could
not now reconcile his immediate past, his tenderness, his love for his
sick wife, and for the other man's child with what was now the case-
with the fact that, seemingly in return for all this, he now found
himself alone, put to shame, a laughingstock, needed by no one, and
despised by everyone.
  For the first two days after his wife's departure Alexei
Alexandrovich received petitioners and his head clerk, drove to the
committee, and went down to dinner in the dining room as usual.
Without giving himself a reason for what he was doing, he strained
every nerve of his being for those two days, simply to preserve an
appearance of composure, and even of indifference. Answering inquiries
about the disposition of Anna Arkadyevna's rooms and belongings, he
had exercised immense self-control to appear like a man in whose
eyes what had occurred was not unforeseen nor out of the ordinary
course of events, and he attained his aim: no one could have
detected in him any signs of despair. But on the second day after
her departure, when Kornei gave him a bill from a fashionable draper's
shop, which Anna had forgotten to pay, and announced that the
shopman was waiting, Alexei Alexandrovich told him to show the man up.
  "Excuse me, Your Excellency, for venturing to trouble you. But if
you direct us to apply to Her Excellency, would you graciously
oblige us with her address?"
  Alexei Alexandrovich pondered, as it seemed to the shopman, and
all at once, turning round, he sat down to the table. Burying his head
in his hands, he sat for a long while in that position, made several
attempts to speak, and stopped short.
  Kornei, perceiving his master's emotion, asked the shopman to call
another time. Left alone, Alexei Alexandrovich realized that he had
not the strength to keep up the role of firmness and composure any
longer. He gave orders for the carriage that was awaiting him to be
taken back, and for no one to be admitted, and he did not go down to
dinner.
  He felt that he could not endure the weight of universal contempt
and exasperation, which he had distinctly seen in the faces of the
shopman and of Kornei and of everyone, without exception, whom he
had met during these two days. He felt that he could not turn aside
from himself the hatred of men, because that hatred did not come
from his being bad (in that case he could have tried to be better),
but from his being shamefully and repulsively unhappy. He knew that
for this, for the very fact that his heart was torn with grief, they
would be merciless to him. He felt that men would crush him as dogs
strangle a mangled dog, yelping with pain. He knew that his sole means
of security against people was to hide his wounds from them, and
instinctively he tried to do this for two days, but now he felt
incapable of keeping up the unequal struggle.
  His despair was even intensified by the consciousness that he was
utterly alone in his sorrow. In all Peterburg there was not a human
being to whom he could express what he was feeling, who would feel for
him, not as a high official, not as a member of society, but simply as
a suffering man; indeed, he had not such a one in the whole world.
  Alexei Alexandrovich grew up an orphan. There were two brothers.
They did not remember their father, and their mother died when
Alexei Alexandrovich was ten years old. The property was a small
one. Their uncle, Karenin, a government official of high standing,
at one time a favorite of the late Czar, had brought them up.
  On completing his high school and university courses with medals,
Alexei Alexandrovich had, with his uncle's aid, immediately started in
a prominent position in the service, and from that time forward he had
devoted himself exclusively to political ambition. In the high
school and the university, and afterward in the service, Alexei
Alexandrovich had never formed a close friendship with anyone. His
brother had been the person nearest to his heart, but he had a post in
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and was always abroad, where he had
died shortly after Alexei Alexandrovich's marriage.
  While he was governor of a province, Anna's aunt, a wealthy
provincial lady, had brought him- middle-aged as he was, though
young for a governor- together with her niece, and had succeeded in
putting him in such a position that he had either to declare himself
or to leave town. Alexei Alexandrovich hesitated a great while.
There were at the time as many reasons for the step as against it, and
there was no overbalancing consideration to outweigh his invariable
rule of abstaining when in doubt. But Anna's aunt had through a common
acquaintance insinuated that he had already compromised the girl,
and that he was in honor bound to propose to her. He proposed, and
concentrated on his betrothed and his wife all the feeling of which he
was capable.
  The attachment he felt to Anna precluded in his heart every need
of intimate relations with others. And now, among all his
acquaintances, he had not one friend. He had plenty of so-called
connections, but no friendships. Alexei Alexandrovich had plenty of
people whom he could invite to dinner, to whose sympathy he could
appeal in any public affair he was concerned about, whose interest
he could reckon upon for anyone he wished to help, with whom he
could candidly discuss other people's business and affairs of state.
But his relations with these people were confined to one clearly
defined channel, and had a certain routine from which it was
impossible to depart. There was one man, a comrade of his at the
university, with whom he had become friendly later, and with whom he
could have spoken of a personal sorrow; but this friend had a post
in the Department of Education in a remote part of Russia. Of the
people in Peterburg the most intimate and most likely were his head
clerk and his doctor.
  Mikhail Vassilievich Sludin, the head clerk, was a
straightforward, intelligent, goodhearted and conscientious man, and
Alexei Alexandrovich was aware of his personal good will. But their
five years of official work together seemed to have put a barrier
between them that cut off warmer relations.
  After signing the papers brought him, Alexei Alexandrovich had sat
for a long while in silence, glancing at Mikhail Vassilievich, and
several times he attempted to speak, but could not. He had already
prepared the phrase: "You have heard of my trouble?" But he ended by
saying as usual: "So you'll get this ready for me?" and with that
dismissed him.
  The other person was the doctor, who had also a kindly feeling for
him; but there had long existed a silent understanding between them
that both were weighed down by work, and always in a hurry.
  Of his women friends, foremost among them Countess Lidia Ivanovna,
Alexei Alexandrovich never thought. All women, simply as women, were
terrible and distasteful to him.
                             XXII.

  Alexei Alexandrovich had forgotten the Countess Lidia Ivanovna but
she had not forgotten him. At the bitterest moment of his lonely
despair she came to him, and, without waiting to be announced,
walked straight into his study. She found him as he was sitting with
his head in both hands.
  "F'ai force la consigne," she said, walking in with rapid steps
and breathing hard with excitement and rapid exertion. "I have heard
all! Alexei Alexandrovich! Dear friend!" she went on, warmly squeezing
his hand in both of hers and gazing with her fine pensive eyes into
his.
  Alexei Alexandrovich, frowning, got up, and, disengaging his hand,
moved a chair up for her.
  "Won't you sit down, Countess? I'm seeing no one because I'm unwell,
Countess," he said, and his lips twitched.
  "Dear friend!" repeated Countess Lidia Ivanovna, never taking her
eyes off his, and suddenly her eyebrows rose at the inner corners,
describing a triangle on her forehead, her ugly yellow face becoming
still uglier, but Alexei Alexandrovich felt that she was sorry for him
and was preparing to cry. And he too was softened; he snatched her
plump hand and proceeded to kiss it.
  "Dear friend!" she said in a voice breaking with emotion. "You ought
not to give way to grief. Your sorrow is a great one, but you ought to
find consolation."
  "I am crushed, I am annihilated, I am no longer a man!" said
Alexei Alexandrovich, letting go her hand, but still gazing into her
brimming eyes. "My position is so awful because I can find nowhere,
I cannot find within me, strength to support me."
  "You will find support; seek it- not in me, though I beseech you
to believe in my friendship," she said, with a sigh. "Our support is
love, that love that He has vouchsafed us. His burden is light," she
said, with the look of ecstasy Alexei Alexandrovich knew so well.
"He will be your support and your succor."
  Although there was in these words a flavor of that sentimental
emotion at her own lofty feelings, and that new mystical fervor
which had lately gained ground in Peterburg, and which seemed to
Alexei Alexandrovich disproportionate, still it was pleasant to him to
hear this now.
  "I am weak. I am crushed. I foresaw nothing, and now I understand
nothing."
  "Dear friend!" repeated Lidia Ivanovna.
  "It's not the loss of what I no longer have; it's not that!" pursued
Alexei Alexandrovich. "I do not grieve for that. But I cannot help
feeling ashamed before other people for the position I am placed in.
It is wrong, but I can't help it- I can't help it."
  "It was not you who performed that noble act of forgiveness, at
which I was moved to ecstasy, and everyone else too, but He, working
within your heart," said Countess Lidia Ivanovna, raising her eyes
rapturously, "and so you cannot be ashamed of your act."
  Alexei Alexandrovich knit his brows, and, crooking his hands, he
cracked his fingers.
  "One must know all the details," he said in his high voice. "A man's
strength has its limits, Countess, and I have reached my limits. The
whole day I have had to be making arrangements, arrangements about
household matters arising" (he emphasized the word arising) "from my
new, solitary position. The servants, the governess, the
accounts.... These pinpricks have stabbed me to the heart, and I
have not the strength to bear it. At dinner... yesterday, I was almost
getting up from the dinner table. I could not bear the way my son
looked at me. He did not ask me the meaning of it all, but he wanted
to ask, and I could not bear the look in his eyes. He was afraid to
look at me, but that is not all..." Alexei Alexandrovich would have
referred to the bill that had been brought him, but his voice shook,
and he stopped. That bill on blue paper, for a hat and ribbons, he
could not recall without a rush of self-pity.
  "I understand, dear friend," said Lidia Ivanovna. "I understand it
all. Succor and comfort you will find not in me, though I have come
only to aid you, if I can. If I could take from off you all these
petty, humiliating cares... I understand that a woman's word, a
woman's superintendence, is needed. You will intrust it to me?"
  Silently and gratefully Alexei Alexandrovich squeezed her hand.
  "Together we will take care of Seriozha. Practical affairs are not
my strong point. But I will set to work. I will be your housekeeper.
Don't thank me. I do it not from myself..."
  "I cannot help thanking you."
  "But, dear friend, do not give way to the feeling of which you
spoke- being ashamed of what is the Christian's highest glory: he
who humbles himself shall be exalted. And you cannot thank me. You
must thank Him, and pray to Him for succor. In Him alone we find
peace, consolation, salvation, and love," she said, and turning her
eyes heavenward, she began praying, as Alexei Alexandrovich gathered
from her silence.
  Alexei Alexandrovich listened to her now, and those expressions
which had seemed to him, if not distasteful, at least exaggerated, now
seemed to him natural and consolatory. Alexei Alexandrovich had
disliked this new enthusiastic fervor. He was a believer, who was
interested in religion primarily in its political aspect, and the
new doctrine which ventured upon several new interpretations, just
because it paved the way to discussion and analysis, was in
principle disagreeable to him. He had hitherto taken up a cold and
even antagonistic attitude to this new doctrine, and with Countess
Lidia Ivanovna, who had been carried away by it, he had never
argued, but by silence had assiduously parried her attempts to provoke
him into argument. Now for the first time he heard her words with
pleasure, and did not inwardly oppose them.
  "I am very, very grateful to you, both for your deeds and for your
words," he said, when she had finished praying.
  Countess Lidia Ivanovna once more squeezed both of her friend's
hands.
  "Now I will enter upon my duties," she said with a smile after a
pause, as she wiped away the traces of tears. "I am going to Seriozha.
Only in the last extremity shall I apply to you." And she got up and
went out.
  Countess Lidia Ivanovna went into Seriozha's part of the house, and,
dropping tears on the scared child's cheeks, she told him that his
father was a saint and his mother was dead.

  Countess Lidia Ivanovna kept her promise. She did actually take upon
herself the care of the organization and management of Alexei
Alexandrovich's household. But she had not overstated the case when
saying that practical affairs were not her strong point. All her
arrangements had to be modified because they could not be carried out,
and they were modified by Kornei, Alexei Alexandrovich's valet, who,
though no one was aware of the fact, now managed Karenin's
household, and quietly and discreetly reported to his master, while
the latter was dressing, all it was necessary for him to know. But
Lidia Ivanovna's help was none the less real; she gave Alexei
Alexandrovich moral support in the consciousness of her love and
respect for him, and still more (as it was soothing to her to believe)
by having almost turned him to Christianity- that is, from an
indifferent and apathetic believer she had turned him into an ardent
and steadfast adherent of the new interpretation of Christian
doctrine, which had been gaining ground of late in Peterburg. It was
easy for Alexei Alexandrovich to believe in this teaching. Alexei
Alexandrovich, like Lidia Ivanovna indeed, and others who shared their
views, was completely devoid of profundity of imagination, that
spiritual faculty in virtue of which the ideas evoked by the
imagination become so actual that they must needs be in harmony with
other ideas, and with reality itself. He saw nothing impossible and
absurd in the idea that death, though existing for unbelievers, did
not exist for him, and that, as he was possessed of the most perfect
faith, of the measure of which he was himself the judge, there was
therefore no sin in his soul, and he was experiencing complete
salvation here on earth.
  It is true that the erroneousness and shallowness of this conception
of his faith was dimly perceptible to Alexei Alexandrovich, and he
knew that when, without the slightest idea that his forgiveness was
the action of a higher power, he had surrendered directly to the
feeling of forgiveness, he had felt more happiness than now, when he
was thinking every instant that Christ was in his heart, and that in
signing official papers he was doing His will. But for Alexei
Alexandrovich it was a necessity to think in that way; it was such a
necessity for him in his humiliation to have some elevated standpoint,
however imaginary, from which, looked down upon by all, he could
look down on others, that he clung, as to his one salvation, to his
delusion of salvation.
                             XXIII.

  The Countess Lidia Ivanovna had, as a very young and enthusiastic
girl, been married to a wealthy man of high rank, a very good-natured,
jovial, and extremely dissipated rake. One month after marriage her
husband abandoned her, and her enthusiastic protestations of affection
he met with an irony and even hostility which people, knowing the
Count's good heart, and seeing no defects in the enthusiastic Lidia,
were at a loss to explain. Though they were divorced and lived
apart, yet whenever the husband met the wife, he invariably behaved to
her with the same malignant irony, the cause of which was
incomprehensible.
  Countess Lidia Ivanovna had long given up being in love with her
husband, but from that time she had never given up being in love
with someone. She was in love with several people at once, both men
and women; she had been in love with almost everyone who had been
particularly distinguished in any way. She was in love with all the
new princes and princesses who married into the Imperial family; she
had been in love with one archbishop, one vicar, and one parish
priest; she had been in love with one journalist, three Slavophils,
with Komissarov, with one minister, one doctor, one English
missionary, and Karenin. All these passions, constantly waning or
growing more ardent, did not prevent her from keeping up the most
extended and complicated relations with the Court and fashionable
society. But from the time that, after Karenin's trouble, she had
taken him under special protection, from the time that she had set
to work in Karenin's household looking after his welfare, she felt
that all her other attachments were not the real thing, and that she
was now genuinely in love, and with no one but Karenin. The feeling
she now experienced for him seemed to her stronger than any of her
former feelings. Analyzing her feeling, and comparing it with former
passions, she distinctly perceived that she would not have been in
love with Komissarov if he had not saved the life of the Czar; that
she would not have been in love with Ristich-Kudzhitsky if there had
been no Slavonic question; but that she loved Karenin for himself, for
his lofty, uncomprehended soul, for the sweet- to her- high notes of
his voice, for his drawling intonation, his weary eyes, his character,
and his soft white hands with their swollen veins. She was not
simply overjoyed at meeting him, but she sought in his face signs of
the impression she was making on him. She tried to please him, not
by her words only, but in her whole person. For his sake it was that
she now lavished more care on her dress than before. She caught
herself in reveries on what might have been, if she had not been
married and he had been free. She blushed with emotion when he came
into the room, she could not repress a smile of rapture when he said
anything amiable to her.
  For several days now Countess Lidia Ivanovna had been in a state
of intense excitement. She had learned that Anna and Vronsky were in
Peterburg. Alexei Alexandrovich must be saved from seeing her, he must
be saved even from the torturing knowledge that that awful woman was
in the same town with him, and that he might meet her any minute.
  Lidia Ivanovna made inquiries through her friends as to what those
shocking people, as she called Anna and Vronsky, intended doing, and
she endeavored so to guide every movement of her friend during those
days that he might not come across them. The young adjutant, a
friend of Vronsky, through whom she obtained her information, and
who hoped through Countess Lidia Ivanovna to obtain a concession, told
her that they had finished their business and were going away next
day. Lidia Ivanovna had already begun to calm down, when the next
morning a note was brought her, the handwriting of which she
recognized with horror. It was the handwriting of Anna Karenina. The
envelope was of paper as thick as bast; on the oblong yellow paper
there was a huge monogram, and the letter smelt of agreeable scent.
  "Who brought it?"
  "A commissionaire from the hotel."
  It was some time before Countess Lidia Ivanovna could sit down to
read the letter. Her excitement brought on an attack of asthma, to
which she was subject. When she had recovered her composure, she
read the following letter in French:

  "Madame la Comtesse- The Christian feelings with which your heart is
filled give me the, I feel, unpardonable boldness to write to you. I
am miserable at being separated from my son. I entreat permission to
see him once before my departure. Forgive me for recalling myself to
your memory. I apply to you and not to Alexei Alexandrovich, simply
because I do not wish to cause that generous man to suffer in
remembering me. Knowing your friendship for him, I know you will
understand me. Could you send Seriozha to me, or should I come to
the house at some fixed hour, or will you let me know when and where I
could see him away from home? I do not anticipate a refusal, knowing
the magnanimity of him with whom it rests. You cannot conceive the
craving I have to see him, and so cannot conceive the gratitude your
help will arouse in me.
                                                           "Anna"

  Everything in this letter exasperated Countess Lidia Ivanovna: its
contents, and the allusion to magnanimity, and especially its free and
easy- as she considered- tone.
  "Say that there is no answer," said Countess Lidia Ivanovna, and
immediately opening her blotting book, she wrote to Alexei
Alexandrovich that she hoped to see him at one o'clock at the levee.
  "I must talk with you of a grave and painful subject. There we
will arrange where to meet. Best of all at my house, where I will
order tea as you like it. Urgent. He lays the cross, but He gives
the strength to bear it," she added, so as to give him some slight
preparation.
  Countess Lidia Ivanovna usually wrote some two or three letters a
day to Alexei Alexandrovich. She enjoyed that form of communication,
which gave opportunity for a refinement and air of mystery not
afforded by their personal interviews.
                             XXIV.

  The levee was drawing to a close. People met as they were going
away, and gossiped of the latest news, of the newly bestowed honors,
and the changes in the positions of the higher functionaries.
  "If only Countess Marya Borissovna were Minister of War, and
Princess Vatkovsky were Commander in Chief," said a gray-headed,
little old man in a gold-embroidered uniform, addressing a tall,
handsome maid of honor who had questioned him about the new
appointments.
  "And if I were one of the adjutants," said the maid of honor,
smiling.
  "You have an appointment already. You're over the Ecclesiastical
Department. And your assistant's Karenin."
  "Good day, Prince!" said the little old man to a man who came up
to him.
  "What were you saying of Karenin?" said the Prince.
  "He and Putiatov have received the order of Alexandre Nevsky."
  "I thought he had it already."
  "No. Just look at him," said the little old man, pointing with his
embroidered hat to Karenin in a Court uniform, with the new red ribbon
across his shoulders, standing in the doorway of the hall with an
influential member of the Imperial Council. "Pleased and happy as
brass," he added, stopping to shake hands with a handsome gentleman of
the bedchamber of colossal proportions.
  "No- he's looking older," said the gentleman of the bedchamber.
  "From overwork. He's always drawing up projects nowadays. He won't
let a poor devil go nowadays till he's explained it all to him under
heads."
  "Looking older, did you say? Il fait des passions. I believe
Countess Lidia Ivanovna's jealous now of his wife."
  "Oh, come now, please don't say any harm of Countess Lidia
Ivanovna."
  "Why, is there any harm in her being in love with Karenin?"
  "But is it true Madame Karenina's here?"
  "Well, not here in the palace, but in Peterburg. I met her yesterday
with Alexei Vronsky, bras dessus, bras dessous, on the Morskaia."
  "C'est un homme qui n'a pas..." the gentleman of the bedchamber
was beginning, but he stopped to make room, bowing, for a member of
the Imperial family to pass.
  Thus people talked incessantly of Alexei Alexandrovich, finding
fault with him and laughing at him, while he, blocking up the way of
the member of the Imperial Council he had captured, was explaining
to him point by point his new financial project, never interrupting
his discourse for an instant for fear he should escape.
  Almost at the same time that his wife left Alexei Alexandrovich
there had come to him that bitterest moment in the life of an
official- the moment when his upward career comes to a full stop. This
full stop had arrived and everyone perceived it, but Alexei
Alexandrovich himself was not yet aware that his career was over.
Whether it was due to his feud with Stremov, or his misfortune with
his wife, or simply that Alexei Alexandrovich had reached his
predestined limits, it had become evident to everyone in the course of
that year that his career was at an end. He still filled a position of
consequence, he sat on many commissions and committees, but he was a
man whose day was over, and from whom nothing was expected. Whatever
he said, whatever he proposed, was heard as though it were something
long familiar, and the very thing that was not needed. But Alexei
Alexandrovich was not aware of this, and, on the contrary, being cut
off from direct participation in governmental activity, he saw more
clearly than ever the errors and defects in the action of others,
and thought it his duty to point out means for their correction.
Shortly after his separation from his wife, he began writing his first
note on the new judicial procedure, the first of the endless series of
notes he was destined to write in the future.
  Alexei Alexandrovich did not merely fail to observe his hopeless
position in the official world, he was not merely free from anxiety on
this head- he was positively more satisfied than ever with his own
activity.
  "He that is married careth for the things of the world, how he may
please his wife; he that is unmarried careth for the things that
belong to the Lord, how he may please the Lord," says the Apostle
Paul, and Alexei Alexandrovich, who was now guided in every action
by Scripture, often recalled this text. It seemed to him that ever
since he had been left without a wife, he had, in these very
projects of reform, been serving the Lord more zealously than ever.
  The unmistakable impatience of the member of the Council trying to
get away from him did not trouble Alexei Alexandrovich; he gave up his
exposition only when the member of the Council, seizing his chance
when one of the Imperial family was passing, slipped away from him.
  Left alone, Alexei Alexandrovich looked down, collecting his
thoughts, then looked casually about him and walked toward the door,
where he hoped to meet Countess Lidia Ivanovna.
  "And how strong they all are- how sound physically," thought
Alexei Alexandrovich, looking at the powerfully built gentleman of the
bedchamber with his well-groomed, perfumed whiskers, and at the red
neck of the Prince, pinched by his tight uniform. He had to pass
them on his way. "Truly is it said that all the world is evil," he
thought, with another sidelong glance at the calves of the gentleman
of the bedchamber.
  Moving forward deliberately, Alexei Alexandrovich bowed with his
customary air of weariness and dignity to the gentleman who had been
talking about him, and, looking toward the door, his eyes sought
Countess Lidia Ivanovna.
  "Ah! Alexei Alexandrovich!" said the little old man, with a
malicious light in his eyes, at the moment when Karenin had come up to
them, and was nodding with a frigid gesture. "I haven't
congratulated you yet," said the old man, pointing to his newly
received ribbon.
  "Thank you," answered Alexei Alexandrovich. "What an exquisite day
today," he added, laying emphasis in his peculiar way on the word
exquisite.
  That they laughed at him he was well aware, but he did not expect
anything but hostility from them; he was used to that by now.
  Catching sight of the yellow shoulders of Lidia Ivanovna jutting out
above her corset, and her fine pensive eyes summoning him to her,
Alexei Alexandrovich smiled, revealing untarnished white teeth, and
went toward her.
  Lidia Ivanovna's dress had cost her great pains, as indeed all her
dresses had done of late. Her aim in dress was now quite the reverse
of what she had pursued thirty years before. Then her desire had
been to adorn herself with something, and the more adorned the better.
Now, on the contrary, she was perforce decked out in a way so
inconsistent with her age and her figure, that her one anxiety was
to contrive that the contrast between these adornments and her own
exterior should not be too appalling. And as far as Alexei
Alexandrovich was concerned she succeeded, and was in his eyes
attractive. For him she was the one island not only of good will to
him, but of love in the midst of the sea of hostility and jeering that
surrounded him.
  Passing through rows of ironical eyes, he was drawn as naturally
to her loving glance as a plant to the sun.
  "I congratulate you," she said to him, her eyes on his ribbon.
  Suppressing a smile of pleasure, he shrugged his shoulders,
closing his eyes, as though to say that that could not be a source
of joy to him. Countess Lidia Ivanovna was very well aware that it was
one of his chief sources of satisfaction, though he never admitted it.
  "How is our angel?" said Countess Lidia Ivanovna, meaning Seriozha.
  "I can't say I was quite pleased with him," said Alexei
Alexandrovich, raising his eyebrows and opening his eyes. "And
Sitnikov is not satisfied with him." (Sitnikov was the tutor to whom
Seriozha's secular education had been intrusted.) "As I have mentioned
to you, there's a sort of coldness in him toward the most important
questions which ought to touch the heart of every man and every
child...." Alexei Alexandrovich began expounding his views on the sole
question that interested him outside the service- the education of his
son.
  When Alexei Alexandrovich, with Lidia Ivanovna's help, had been
brought back anew to life and activity, he felt it his duty to
undertake the education of the son left on his hands. Having never
before taken any interest in educational questions, Alexei
Alexandrovich devoted some time to the theoretical study of the
subject. After reading several books on anthropology, education, and
didactics, Alexei Alexandrovich drew up a plan of education, and,
engaging the best tutor in Peterburg to superintend it, he set to
work, and the subject continually absorbed him.
  "Yes- but the heart! I see in him his father's heart, and with
such a heart a child cannot go far wrong," said Lidia Ivanovna with
enthusiasm.
  "Yes, perhaps.... As for me, I do my duty. It's all I can do."
  "You're coming to me," said Countess Lidia Ivanovna, after a
pause; "we have to speak of a subject painful for you. I would give
anything to have spared you certain memories, but others are not of
the same mind. I have received a letter from her. She is here in
Peterburg."
  Alexei Alexandrovich shuddered at the allusion to his wife, but
immediately his face assumed the deathlike rigidity which expressed
utter helplessness in the matter.
  "I was expecting it," he said.
  Countess Lidia Ivanovna looked at him ecstatically, and tears of
rapture at the greatness of his soul came into her eyes.
                             XXV.

  When Alexei Alexandrovich came into the Countess Lidia Ivanovna's
snug little boudoir, decorated with old china and hung with portraits,
the lady herself had not yet made her appearance.
  She was changing her dress.
  A cloth was laid on a round table, and on it stood a china tea
service and a silver teakettle and spirit lamp. Alexei Alexandrovich
looked idly about at the endless familiar portraits which adorned
the room, and, sitting down to the table, he opened a New Testament
lying upon it. The rustle of the Countess's silk skirt drew his
attention off.
  "Well, now, we can sit quietly," said Countess Lidia Ivanovna,
slipping hurriedly with an agitated smile between the table and the
sofa, "and talk over our tea."
  After some words of preparation, Countess Lidia Ivanovna,
breathing hard and flushing crimson, gave into Alexei
Alexandrovich's hands the letter she had received.
  After reading the letter, he sat a long while in silence.
  "I don't think I have the right to refuse her," he said, timidly
lifting his eyes.
  "Dear friend, you never see evil in anyone!"
  "On the contrary, I see that all is evil. But whether it is just..."
  His face showed irresolution, and a seeking for counsel, support,
and guidance, in a matter he did not understand.
  "No," Countess Lidia Ivanovna interrupted him; "there are limits
to everything. I can understand immorality," she said, not quite
truthfully, since she never could understand that which leads women to
immorality; "but I don't understand cruelty- to whom? To you! How
can she stay in the town where you are? No, the longer one lives the
more one learns. And I'm learning to understand your loftiness and her
baseness."
  "Who is to cast a stone?" said Alexei Alexandrovich, unmistakably
pleased with the part he had to play. "I have forgiven all, and so I
cannot deprive her of what is exacted by love in her- by her love
for her son...."
  "But is that love, my friend? Is it sincere? Admitting that you have
forgiven- that you forgive... have we the right to work on the soul of
that angel? He looks on her as dead. He prays for her, and beseeches
God to have mercy on her sins. And it is better so. But now what
will he think?"
  "I had not thought of that," said Alexei Alexandrovich, evidently
agreeing.
  Countess Lidia Ivanovna hid her face in her hands and was silent.
She was praying.
  "If you ask my advice," she said, having finished her prayer and
uncovered her face, "I do not advise you to do this. Do you suppose
I don't see how you are suffering, how this has torn open your wounds?
But supposing that, as always, you don't think of yourself- what can
it lead to?- To fresh suffering for you, to torture for the child.
If there were a trace of humanity left in her, she ought not to wish
it herself. No, I have no hesitation in saying I advise against it,
and if you will intrust it to me, I will write to her."
  And Alexei Alexandrovich consented, and Countess Lidia Ivanovna sent
the following letter in French:

  "Dear Madame- To be reminded of you might result in your son's
asking questions, which could not be answered without implanting in
the child's soul a spirit of censure toward what should be for him
sacred, and therefore I beg you to interpret your husband's refusal in
the spirit of Christian love. I pray to Almighty God to have mercy
on you.

                                                 "Countess Lidia"

  This letter attained the secret object which Countess Lidia Ivanovna
had concealed from herself. It wounded Anna to the quick.
  For his part, Alexei Alexandrovich, on returning home from Lidia
Ivanovna's, could not all that day concentrate himself on his usual
pursuits, and find that spiritual peace of one saved and believing
which he had felt of late.
  The thought of his wife, who had so greatly sinned against him,
and toward whom he had been so saintly, as Countess Lidia Ivanovna had
so justly told him, ought not to have troubled him; but he was not
easy; he could not understand the book he was reading; he could not
drive away harassing recollections of his relations with her, of the
mistake which, as it now seemed, he had made in regard to her. The
memory of how he had received her confession of infidelity on their
way home from the races (especially his having insisted only on the
observance of external decorum, and not having sent a challenge)
tortured him like a remorse. He was tortured, too, by the thought of
the letter he had written her; and, most of all, his forgiveness,
which nobody wanted, and his care of the other man's child, seared his
heart with shame and remorse.
  And just the same feeling of shame and remorse he felt now, as he
reviewed all his past with her, recalling the awkward words in
which, after long wavering, he proposed to her.
  "But how have I been to blame?" he said to himself. And this
question always excited another question in him- whether they felt
differently, did their loving and marrying differently, these Vronskys
and Oblonskys... these gentlemen of the bedchamber, with their fine
calves. And there passed before his mind a whole series of these
succulent, vigorous, self-confident men, who always and everywhere
drew his inquisitive attention in spite of himself. He tried to dispel
these thoughts, he tried to persuade himself that he was not living
for this transient life, but for the life of eternity, and that
there was peace and love in his heart. But the fact that he had in
this transient, trivial life made, as it seemed to him, a few
trivial mistakes, tortured him as though the eternal salvation in
which he believed had no existence. But this temptation did not last
long, and soon there was reestablished once more in Alexei
Alexandrovich's soul the peace and the loftiness by virtue of which he
could forget what he did not want to remember.
                             XXVI.

  "Well, Kapitonich?" said Seriozha, coming back rosy and good-humored
from his walk the day before his birthday, and giving his Russian
plaited overcoat to the tall old hall porter, who smiled down at the
little person from the height of his long figure. "Well, has the
bandaged official been here today? Did papa see him?"
  "He saw him. The minute the head clerk came out, I announced him,"
said the hall porter with a good-humored wink. "Here, I'll take it
off."
  "Seriozha!" said his Slavonic tutor, stopping in the doorway leading
to the inner rooms. "Take it off yourself." But Seriozha, though he
heard the tutor's feeble voice, did not pay attention to it. He
stood keeping hold of the hall porter's shoulder knot and gazing
into his face.
  "Well, and did papa do what he wanted for him?"
  The hall porter nodded his head affirmatively.
  The bandaged official, who had already been seven times to ask
some favor of Alexei Alexandrovich, interested both Seriozha and the
hall porter. Seriozha had come upon him in the hall, and had heard him
plaintively beg the hall porter to announce him, saying that he and
his children had death staring them in the face.
  Since then Seriozha, having met him a second time in the hall,
took great interest in him.
  "Well, was he very glad?" he asked.
  "Glad? I should think so! Almost dancing as he walked away."
  "And has anything been left for me?" asked Seriozha, after a pause.
  "Come, sir," said the hall porter; then with a shake of his head
he whispered: "Something from the Countess."
  Seriozha understood at once that what the hall porter was speaking
of was a present from Countess Lidia Ivanovna for his birthday.
  "You don't say? Where?"
  "Kornei took it to your papa. A fine plaything it must be, too!"
  "How big? Like this?"
  "Rather small, but a fine thing."
  "A book?"
  "No-something else. Run along, run along, Vassilii Lukich is calling
you," said the porter, hearing the tutor's steps approaching, and,
carefully taking away from his shoulder knot the little hand in the
glove half-pulled off, he indicated with his head Lukich, the tutor.
  "Vassilii Lukich, I'm coming in one tiny minute!" answered
Seriozha with gay and loving smile which always won over the careful
Vassilii Lukich.
  Seriozha was too happy; everything was too delightful for him to
be able to help sharing with his friend the porter the family good
fortune, of which he had heard from Lidia Ivanovna's niece during
his walk in the public gardens. This piece of good news seemed to
him particularly important from its coming at the same time with the
joy of the bandaged official, and his own joy at toys having come
for him. It seemed to Seriozha that this was a day on which everyone
ought to be glad and happy.
  "You know papa's received the order of Alexandre Nevsky today?"
  "To be sure I do! People have already been here to congratulate
him."
  "And is he glad?"
  "Glad at the Czar's gracious favor? I should think so! It's a
proof he's deserved it," said the porter sternly and seriously.
  Seriozha fell to musing, gazing up at the face of the porter,
which he had thoroughly studied in every detail, especially at his
chin, which hung down between the gray whiskers- never seen by
anyone but Seriozha, who saw him only from below.
  "Well, and has your daughter been to see you lately?"
  The porter's daughter was a ballet dancer.
  "When is she to come on weekdays? They've their lessons to learn,
too. And you've your lesson, sir; run along."
  On coming into the room Seriozha, instead of sitting down to his
lessons, told his tutor of his supposition that what had been
brought him must be a toy railway. "What do you think?" he inquired.
  But Vassilii Lukich was thinking of nothing but the necessity of
learning the grammar lesson for the teacher, who was coming at two.
  "No, do just tell me, Vassilii Lukich," he asked suddenly, when he
was seated at their worktable with the book in his hands, "what is
greater than the Alexandre Nevsky? You know papa's received the
Alexandre Nevsky?"
  Vassilii Lukich replied that the Vladimir was greater than the
Alexandre Nevsky.
  "And higher still?"
  "Well, highest of all is the Andrei Pervozvanny."
  "And higher than the Andrei?"
  "I don't know."
  "What- you don't know?" And Seriozha, leaning on his elbows, sank
into deep meditation.
  His meditations were of the most complex and diverse character. He
imagined his father's having been suddenly presented with both the
Vladimir and the Andrei today, and in consequence being much better
tempered at his lesson; and dreamed how, when he was grown up, he
would himself receive all the orders, and what might be invented
higher than the Andrei. Directly any higher order were invented, he
would win it. They would make a higher one still, and he would
immediately win that too.
  The time passed in such meditations, and when the teacher came,
the lesson about the adverbs of place and time and manner of action
was not ready, and the teacher was not only displeased, but hurt. This
touched Seriozha. He felt he was not to blame for not having learned
the lesson; however much he tried, he was utterly unable to do it.
As long as the teacher was explaining to him, he believed him and
seemed to comprehend, but as soon as he was left alone, he was
positively unable to recollect and to understand that the short and
familiar word "suddenly" is an adverb of manner of action. Still he
was sorry that he had disappointed the teacher, and he was anxious
to comfort him.
  He chose a moment when the teacher was looking in silence at the
book.
  "Mikhail Ivanich, when is your birthday?" he asked, all of a sudden.
  "You'd much better be thinking about your work. Birthdays are of
no importance to a rational being. It's a day like any other, on which
one has to do one's work."
  Seriozha looked intently at the teacher, at his scanty beard, at his
spectacles, which had slipped down below the ridge on his nose, and
fell into so deep a reverie that he heard nothing of what the
teacher was explaining to him. He knew that the teacher did not
think what he had said- he felt it from the tone in which it was said.
"But why have they all agreed to speak, just in the same manner,
always the dreariest and most useless stuff? Why does he keep me
off; why doesn't he love me?" he asked himself mournfully, and could
not think of an answer.
                             XXVII.

  After the lesson with the teacher of grammar came his father's
lesson. While waiting for his father, Seriozha sat at the table
playing with a penknife, and fell to musing. Among Seriozha's favorite
occupations was searching for his mother during his walks. He did
not believe in death generally, and in her death in particular, in
spite of what Lidia Ivanovna had told him and his father had
confirmed, and it was just because of that, and after he had been told
she was dead, that he had begun looking for her when out for a walk.
Every woman of full, graceful figure with dark hair was his mother. At
the sight of such a woman such a feeling of tenderness stirred
within him that his breath failed him, and tears came into his eyes.
And he was on tiptoe with expectation that she would come up to him,
would lift her veil. All her face would be visible, she would smile,
she would hug him, he would sniff her fragrance, feel the softness
of her arms, and cry with happiness, just as he had one evening lain
on her lap while she tickled him, and he laughed and bit her white,
ring-covered fingers. Later, when he accidentally learned from his old
nurse that his mother was not dead, and his father and Lidia
Ivanovna had explained to him that she was dead to him because she was
wicked (which he could not possibly believe, because he loved her), he
went on seeking her and expecting her in the same way. That day in the
public gardens there had been a lady in a lilac veil, whom he had
watched with a throbbing heart, believing it to be her as she came
toward them along the path. The lady had not come up to them, but
had disappeared somewhere. That day, more intensely than ever,
Seriozha felt a rush of love for her, and now, waiting for his father,
he forgot everything, and cut all round the edge of the table with his
penknife, staring straight before him with sparkling eyes, and
thinking of her.
  "Here is your papa," Vassilii Lukich diverted him.
  Seriozha jumped up and went up to his father, and, kissing his hand,
looked at him intently, trying to discover signs of his joy at
receiving the Alexandre Nevsky.
  "Did you have a good walk?" said Alexei Alexandrovich, sitting
down in his easy chair, pulling the volume of the Old Testament to him
and opening it. Although Alexei Alexandrovich had more than once
told Seriozha that every Christian ought to know Scripture history
thoroughly, he often referred to the Bible himself during the
lesson, and Seriozha observed this.
  "Yes, it was very good indeed, papa," said Seriozha, sitting
sideways on his chair and rocking it, which was forbidden. "I saw
Nadinka" (Nadinka was a niece of Lidia Ivanovna's who was being
brought up in her house). "She told me you'd been given a new star.
Are you glad, papa?"
  "First of all, don't rock your chair, please," said Alexei
Alexandrovich. "And secondly, it's not the reward that's precious, but
the work itself. And I could have wished you had understood that. If
you now are going to work, to study, in order to win a reward, then
the work will seem hard to you; but when you work" (Alexei
Alexandrovich, as he spoke, thought of how he had been sustained by
a sense of duty through the wearisome labor of the morning, consisting
of signing one hundred and eighty papers), "loving your work, you will
find your reward for it."
  Seriozha's eyes hitherto shining with gaiety and tenderness, grew
dull and dropped before his father's gaze. This was the same
long-familiar tone his father always took with him, and Seriozha had
learned by now to fall in with it. His father always talked to him- so
Seriozha felt- as though he were addressing some boy of his own
imagination, one of those boys who exist in books, utterly unlike
himself. And Seriozha always tried, before his father, to pretend
being this storybook boy.
  "You understand that, I hope?" said his father.
  "Yes, papa," answered Seriozha, acting the part of the imaginary
boy.
  The lesson consisted of learning by heart several verses out of
the Evangel and the repetition of the beginning of the Old
Testament. The verses from the Evangel Seriozha knew fairly well,
but at the moment when he was saying them he became so absorbed in
watching the sharply protruding, bony knobbiness of his father's
forehead, that he lost the thread, and he transposed the end of one
verse and the beginning of another. It was evident to Alexei
Alexandrovich that he did not understand what he was saying, and
this irritated him.
  He frowned, and began explaining what Seriozha had heard many
times before and never could remember, because he understood it too
well, just as that "suddenly" is an adverb of manner of action.
Seriozha looked with scared eyes at his father, and could think of
nothing but whether his father would make him repeat what he had said,
as he sometimes did. And this thought so alarmed Seriozha that he
now understood nothing. But his father did not make him repeat it, and
passed on to the lesson out of the Old Testament. Seriozha recounted
the events themselves well enough, but when he had to answer questions
as to what certain events prefigured, he knew nothing, though he had
already been punished over this lesson. The passage at which he was
utterly unable to say anything, and began fidgeting and cutting the
table and swinging his chair, was where he had to tell of the
patriarchs before the Flood. He did not know one of them, except
Enoch, who had been taken up alive to heaven. Last time he had
remembered their names, but now he had forgotten them utterly, chiefly
because Enoch was the personage he liked best in the whole of the
Old Testament, and Enoch's translation to heaven was connected in
his mind with a whole long train of thought, in which he became
absorbed now while he gazed with fascinated eyes at his father's watch
chain and a half-unbuttoned button on his waistcoat.
  In death, of which they talked to him so often, Seriozha disbelieved
entirely. He did not believe that those he loved could die, above
all that he himself would die. That was to him something utterly
inconceivable and impossible. But he had been told all men die; he had
asked people, indeed, whom he trusted, and they, too, had confirmed
it; his old nurse, too, said the same, though reluctantly. But Enoch
had not died, and so it followed that everyone did not die. "And why
cannot anyone else so serve God and be taken alive to heaven?" thought
Seriozha. Bad people- that is, those Seriozha did not like- might die,
but the good might all be like Enoch.
  "Well, what are the names of the patriarchs?"
  "Enoch, Enos-"
  "But you have said that already. This is bad. Seriozha, very bad. If
you don't try to learn what is most necessary of all for a Christian,"
said his father, getting up, "whatever can interest you? I am
displeased with you, and Piotr Ignatich" (this was the chief
pedagogue) "is displeased with you.... I shall have to punish you."
  His father and his teacher were both displeased with Seriozha, and
he certainly did learn his lessons very badly. But still it could
not be said he was a stupid boy. On the contrary, he was far
cleverer than the boys his teacher held up as examples to Seriozha. In
his father's opinion, he did not want to learn what he was taught.
In reality he could not learn that. He could not, because the claims
of his own soul were more binding on him that those claims his
father and his teacher made upon him. Those claims were in opposition,
and he was in direct conflict with his governors.
  He was nine years old; he was a child; but he knew his own soul,
it was precious to him; he guarded it as the eyelid guards the eye,
and without the key of love he let no one into his soul. His
teachers complained that he would not learn, while his soul was
brimming over with thirst for knowledge. And he learned from
Kapitonich, from his nurse, from Nadinka, from Vassilii Lukich- but
not from his teachers. The spring his father and his teachers reckoned
upon to turn their mill wheels had long oozed at another place, and
its waters did their work there.
  His father punished Seriozha by not letting him go to see Nadinka,
Lidia Ivanovna's niece; but this punishment turned out happily for
Seriozha. Vassilii Lukich was in a good humor, and showed him how to
make windmills. The whole evening passed over this work and in
dreaming how to make a windmill on which he could turn himself-
clutching at the wings or tying himself on and whirling round. Of
his mother Seriozha did not think all the evening, but, when he had
gone to bed, he suddenly remembered her, and prayed in his own words
that tomorrow his mother, in time for his birthday, might leave off
hiding herself and come to him.
  "Vassilii Lukich, do you know what I prayed for tonight- extra
beside the regular things?"
  "That you might learn your lessons better?"
  "No."
  "Toys?"
  "No. You'll never guess. A splendid thing- but it's a secret. When
it comes to pass I'll tell you. Can't you guess?"
  "No, I can't guess. You tell me," said Vassilii Lukich with a smile,
which was rare with him. "Come, lie down, I'm putting out the candle."
  "Without the candle I can see better what I see and what I prayed
for. There! I was almost telling the secret!" said Seriozha,
laughing gaily.
  When the candle was taken away, Seriozha heard his mother and felt
her presence. She stood over him, and her loving gaze caressed him.
But then came windmills- a penknife- everything became confused, and
he fell asleep.
                             XXVIII.

  On arriving in Peterburg, Vronsky and Anna stayed at one of the best
hotels; Vronsky apart in a lower story, Anna above with her child, its
nurse, and her maid, in a large suite of four rooms.
  On the day of his arrival Vronsky went to his brother's. There he
found his mother, who had come from Moscow on business. His mother and
sister-in-law greeted him as usual: they asked him about his stay
abroad, and talked of their common acquaintances, but did not let drop
a single word in allusion to his connection with Anna. His brother
came next morning to see Vronsky, and of his own accord asked him
about her, and Alexei Vronsky told him directly that he looked upon
his connection with Madame Karenina as marriage; that he hoped to
arrange a divorce, and then to marry her, and until then he considered
her as much a wife as any other wife, and he begged him to tell
their mother and his wife so.
  "If the world disapproves, I don't care," said Vronsky; "but if my
relations want to be on terms of relationship with me, they will
have to be on the same terms with my wife."
  The elder brother, who had always a respect for his younger
brother's judgment, could not well tell whether he was right or not
till the world had decided the question; for his part he had nothing
against it, and with Alexei he went up to see Anna.
  Before his brother, as before everyone, Vronsky addressed Anna
with a certain formality, treating her as he might a very intimate
friend, but it was understood that his brother knew their real
relations, and they talked about Anna's going to Vronsky's estate.
  In spite of all his social experience Vronsky was, in consequence of
the new position in which he was placed, laboring under a strange
misapprehension. One would have thought he must have understood that
society was closed for him and Anna; but now some vague ideas had
sprung up in his brain that this was only the case in old-fashioned
days, and that now, with the rapidity of modern progress (he had
unconsciously become by now a partisan of every sort of progress), the
views of society had changed, and that the question of their reception
by society was far from decided. "Of course," he thought, "she would
not be received at Court, but intimate friends can, and must, look
at it in the proper light."
  One may sit for several hours at a stretch with one's legs crossed
in the same position, if one knows that there's nothing to prevent
one's changing one's position; but if a man knows that he must
remain sitting so with crossed legs, then cramps come on, the legs
begin to twitch and to strain toward the spot to which one would
like to draw them. This was what Vronsky was experiencing in regard to
the world. Though at the bottom of his heart he knew that the world
was shut on them, he put it to the test whether the world had not
changed by now and would not receive them. But he very quickly
perceived that though the world was open for him personally, it was
closed for Anna. Just as in the game of cat and mouse, the hands
raised for him were dropped to bar the way for Anna.
  One of the first ladies of Peterburg society whom Vronsky saw was
his cousin Betsy.
  "At last!" she greeted him joyfully. "And Anna? How glad I am! Where
are you stopping? I can fancy after your delightful travels you must
find our poor Peterburg horrid. I can fancy your honeymoon in Rome.
How about the divorce? Is that all over?"
  Vronsky noticed that Betsy's enthusiasm waned when she learned
that no divorce had as yet taken place.
  "People will cast a stone at me, I know," she said, "but I shall
come and see Anna; yes, I shall certainly come. You won't be here
long, I suppose?"
  And she did certainly come to see Anna the same day, but her tone
was not at all the same as in former days. She unmistakably prided
herself on her courage, and wished Anna to appreciate the fidelity
of her friendship. She only stayed ten minutes, talking of society
news, and on leaving she said:
  "You've never told me when the divorce is to be? Supposing I'm ready
to fling my cap over the mill, other starchy people will give you
the cold shoulder until you're married. And that's so simple nowadays.
Ca se fait. So you're going on Friday? Sorry we shan't see each
other again."
  From Betsy's tone Vronsky might have grasped what he had to expect
from the world; but he made another effort in his own family. His
mother he did not reckon upon. He knew that his mother, who had been
so enthusiastic over Anna at their first acquaintance, would have no
mercy on her now for having ruined her son's career. But he had more
hope of Varia, his brother's wife. He fancied she would not cast a
stone, and would go simply and directly to see Anna, and would receive
her in her own house.
  The day after his arrival Vronsky went to her, and finding her
alone, expressed his wishes directly.
  "You know, Alexei," she said after hearing him, "how fond I am of
you, and how ready I am to do anything for you; but I have not spoken,
because I knew I could be of no use to you and to Anna Arkadyevna,"
she said, articulating the name "Anna Arkadyevna" with particular
care. "Don't suppose, please, that I judge her. Never! Perhaps in
her place I should have done the same. I don't and can't enter into
that," she said, glancing timidly at his gloomy face. "But one must
call things by their names. You want me to go and see her, to ask
her here, and to rehabilitate her in society; but do understand that I
cannot do so. I have daughters growing up, and I must live in the
world for my husband's sake. Well, I'm ready to come and see Anna
Arkadyevna- she will understand that I can't ask her here, or I should
have to do so in such a way that she would not meet people who look at
things differently; that would offend her. I can't raise her..."
  "Oh, I don't regard her as having fallen more than hundreds of women
you do receive!" Vronsky interrupted her still more gloomily, and he
got up in silence, understanding that his sister-in-law's decision was
not to be shaken.
  "Alexei! Don't be angry with me. Please understand that I'm not to
blame," began Varia, looking at him with a timid smile.
  "I'm not angry with you," he said still as gloomily; "but this is
doubly painful to me. I'm sorry, too, that this means breaking up
our friendship- if not breaking up, at least weakening it. You will
understand that for me, too, it cannot be otherwise."
  And with that he left her.
  Vronsky knew that further efforts were useless, and that he had to
spend these few days in Peterburg as though in a strange town,
avoiding every sort of relation with his own old circle in order not
to be exposed to the annoyances and humiliations which were so
intolerable to him. One of the most unpleasant features of his
position in Peterburg was that Alexei Alexandrovich and his name
seemed to meet him everywhere. He could not begin to talk of
anything without the conversation turning on Alexei Alexandrovich,
he could not go anywhere without risk of meeting him. So at least it
seemed to Vronsky, just as it seems to a man with a sore finger that
he is continually, as though on purpose, grazing his sore finger
against everything.
  Their stay in Peterburg was the more painful to Vronsky because he
perceived all the time a sort of new mood he could not understand in
Anna. At one time she would seem in love with him, and the next she
would become cold, irritable, and impenetrable. She was worrying
over something, and keeping something back from him, and did not
seem to notice the humiliations which poisoned his existence, and
which for her, with her delicate intuition, must have been still
more unbearable.
                             XXIX.

  One of Anna's objects in coming back to Russia had been to see her
son. From the day she left Italy the thought of seeing him had never
ceased to agitate her. And, as she got nearer to Peterburg, the
delight and importance of this meeting grew ever greater in her
imagination. She did not even put to herself the problem of how to
arrange it. It seemed to her natural and simple to see her son when
she should be in the same town with him. But on her arrival in
Peterburg she was suddenly made distinctly aware of her present
position in society, and she grasped the fact that to arrange this
meeting was no easy matter.
  She had now been two days in Peterburg. The thought of her son never
left her for a single instant, but she had not yet seen him. To go
straight to the house, where she might meet Alexei Alexandrovich- that
she felt she had no right to do. She might be refused admittance and
insulted. To write and so enter into relations with her husband- the
thought of doing that made her miserable; she could only be at peace
when she did not think of her husband. To get a glimpse of her son out
walking, finding out where and when he went out, was not enough for
her; she had so looked forward to this meeting, she had so much she
must say to him, she so longed to embrace him, to kiss him. Seriozha's
old nurse might be a help to her and show her what to do. But the
nurse was not now living in Alexei Alexandrovich's house. In this
uncertainty, and in efforts to find the nurse, two days had slipped
by.
  Hearing of the close intimacy between Alexei Alexandrovich and
Countess Lidia Ivanovna, Anna decided on the third day to write her
a letter, which cost her great pains, and in which she intentionally
said that permission to see her son must depend on her husband's
magnanimity. She knew that if the letter were shown to her husband, he
would keep up his role of magnanimity, and would not refuse her
request.
  The commissionaire who took the letter had brought her back the most
cruel and unexpected answer- that there was no answer. She had never
felt so humiliated as at the moment when, sending for
commissionaire, she heard from him the exact account of how he had
waited, and how afterward he had been told there was no answer. Anna
felt humiliated, insulted, but she saw that from her point of view
Countess Lidia Ivanovna was right. Her suffering was the more poignant
since she had to bear it in solitude. She could not and would not
share it with Vronsky. She knew that to him, although he was the
primary cause of her distress, the question of her seeing her son
would seem a matter of very little consequence. She knew that he would
never be capable of understanding all the depth of her suffering, that
for his cool tone at any allusion to it she would begin to hate him.
And she dreaded that more than anything in the world, and so she hid
from him everything that related to her son.
  Spending the whole day at home she considered ways of seeing her
son, and had reached a decision to write to her husband. She was
just composing this letter when she was handed the letter from Lidia
Ivanovna. The Countess's silence had subdued and depressed her, but
the letter, all that she read between the lines in it, so
exasperated her, this malice was so revolting beside her passionate,
legitimate tenderness for her son, that she turned against other
people and left off blaming herself.
  "This coldness is simulation of feeling!" she said to herself. "They
must needs insult me and torture the child, and I am to submit to
it! Not on any consideration! She is worse than I am. I don't lie,
anyway." And she decided on the spot that next day, Seriozha's
birthday, she would go straight to her husband's house, bribe the
servants, deceive the people, but at any cost see her son and overturn
the hideous deception with which they were encompassing the unhappy
child.
  She went to a toyshop, bought toys, and thought over a plan of
action. She would go early in the morning at eight o'clock, when
Alexei Alexandrovich would be certain not to be up. She would have
money in her hand to give the hall porter and the footman, so that
they should let her in, and, without raising her veil, she would say
that she had come from Seriozha's godfather to congratulate him, and
that she had been charged to leave the toys at his bedside. She had
prepared everything but the words she should say to her son. Often she
dreamed of it, she could never think of anything.
  The next day, at eight o'clock in the morning, Anna got out of a
hired coach and rang at the front entrance of her former home.
  "Run and see what's wanted. Some lady," said Kapitonich, who, not
yet dressed, in his overcoat and galoshes, had peeped out of the
window and seen a lady in a veil standing close up to the door. His
assistant, a lad Anna did not know, had no sooner opened the door to
her than she came in, and pulling a three-rouble note out of her
muff put it hurriedly into his hand.
  "Seriozha- Sergei Alexeich," she said, and was going on.
Scrutinizing the note, the porter's assistant stopped her at the
second glass door.
  "Whom do you want?" he asked.
  She did not hear his words and made no answer.
  Noticing the embarrassment of the unknown lady, Kapitonich went
out to her, opened the second door for her, and asked her what she was
pleased to want.
  "From Prince Skorodumov for Sergei Alexeich," she said.
  "He's not up yet," said the porter, looking at her attentively.
  Anna had not anticipated that the absolutely unchanged hall of the
house where she had lived for nine years would so greatly affect
her. Memories sweet and painful rose one after another in her heart,
and for a moment she forgot what she was here for.
  "Would you kindly wait?" said Kapitonich, taking off her fur cloak.
  As he took off the cloak, Kapitonich glanced at her face, recognized
her, and made her a low bow in silence.
  "Please walk in, Your Excellency," he said to her.
  She tried to say something, but her voice refused to utter any
sound; with a guilty and imploring glance at the old man she went with
light, swift steps up the stairs. Bent double, and his galoshes
catching in the steps, Kapitonich ran after her, trying to overtake
her.
  "The tutor's there; maybe he's not dressed. I'll let him know."
  Anna still mounted the familiar staircase, not understanding what
the old man was saying.
  "This way, to the left, if you please. Excuse its not being tidy.
He's in the former smoking room now," the hall porter said, panting.
"Excuse me, wait a little, Your Excellency; I'll just see," he said,
and overtaking her, he opened the high door and disappeared behind it.
Anna stood still waiting. "He's only just awake," said the hall
porter, coming out.
  And at the very instant the porter said this, Anna caught the
sound of a childish yawn. From the sound of this yawn alone she knew
her son and seemed to see him living before her eyes.
  "Let me in; go away!" she said and went in through the high doorway.
On the right of the door stood a bed, and sitting up in the bed was
the boy. His little body bent forward, his nightshirt unbuttoned, he
was stretching and still yawning. The instant his lips came together
they curved into a blissfully sleepy smile, and with that smile he
slowly and deliciously rolled back again.
  "Seriozha!" she whispered, walking noiselessly up to him.
  When she was parted from him, and all this latter time when she
had been feeling a fresh rush of love for him, she had pictured him as
he was at four years old, when she had loved him most of all. Now he
was not even the same as when she had left him; he was farther than
ever from the four-year-old baby, more grown and thinner. How thin his
face was, how short his hair was! What long hands! How he had
changed since she left him! But it was he with his head, his lips, his
soft neck and broad little shoulders.
  "Seriozha!" she repeated, in the child's very ear.
  He raised himself again on his elbow, turned his tousled head from
side to side, as though looking for something, and opened his eyes.
Quietly and inquiringly he looked for several seconds at his mother
standing motionless before him, then all at once he smiled a
blissful smile, and shutting his eyes again, rolled not backward but
toward her, into her arms.
  "Seriozha! My darling boy!" she said, breathing hard and putting her
arms around his plump little body.
  "Mother!" he said, wriggling about in her arms so as to touch her
hands with different parts of him.
  Smiling sleepily still, with closed eyes, he flung his fat little
arms round her shoulders, rolled toward her, with the delicious sleepy
warmth and fragrance that is only found in children, and began rubbing
his face against her neck and shoulders.
  "I knew," he said, opening his eyes. "It's my birthday today. I knew
you'd come. I'll get up directly."
  And saying that he dropped asleep.
  Anna looked at him hungrily; she saw how he had grown and changed in
her absence. She knew, and did not know, the bare legs so long now,
that were thrust out below the quilt; she knew those short-cropped
curls on his neck in which she had so often kissed him. She touched
all this and could say nothing; tears choked her.
  "What are you crying for, mother?" he said, waking up completely.
"Mother, what are you crying for?" he cried in a tearful voice.
  "I?... I won't cry... I'm crying for joy. It's so long since I've
seen you. I won't, I won't," she said, gulping down her tears and
turning away. "Come, it's time for you to dress now," she added, after
a pause, and, never letting go his hands, she sat down by his
bedside on the chair, where his clothes were put ready for him.
  "How do you dress without me? How..." she made an attempt to talk
simply and cheerfully, but she could not, and again she turned away.
  "I don't have a cold bath- papa didn't order it. And you've not seen
Vassilii Lukich? He'll come in soon. Why, you're sitting on my
clothes!"
  And Seriozha went off into a peal of laughter. She looked at him and
smiled.
  "Mother, darling, sweet one!" he shouted, flinging himself on her
again and hugging her. It was as if only now, on seeing her smile,
he fully grasped what had happened. "I don't want that on," he said,
taking off her hat. And, as it were, seeing her afresh without her
hat, he fell to kissing her again.
  "But what did you think about me? You didn't think I was dead?"
  "I never believed it."
  "You didn't believe it, my sweet?"
  "I knew, I knew!" he repeated his favorite phrase, and snatching the
hand that was stroking his hair, he pressed the open palm to his mouth
and kissed it.
                             XXX.

  Meanwhile Vassilii Lukich had not at first understood who this
lady was, and had learned from their conversation that it was no other
person than the mother who had left her husband, and whom he had not
seen, as he had entered the house after her departure. He was in doubt
whether to go in or not, or whether to communicate with Alexei
Alexandrovich. Reflecting finally that his duty was to get Seriozha up
at the hour fixed, and that it was therefore not his business to
consider who was there, the mother or anyone else, but simply to do
his duty, he finished dressing, went to the door and opened it.
  But the embraces of the mother and child, the sound of their voices,
and what they were saying, made him change his mind. He shook his
head, and with a sigh he closed the door. "I'll wait another ten
minutes," he said to himself, clearing his throat and wiping away
tears.
  Among the servants of the household there was intense excitement all
this time. All had heard that their mistress had come, and that
Kapitonich had let her in, and that she was even now in the nursery,
and everyone knew that their master always went in person to the
nursery at nine o'clock, and everyone fully comprehended that it was
impossible for the husband and wife to meet, and that they must
prevent it. Kornei, the valet, going down to the hall porter's room,
asked who had let her in, and how it was he had done so, and
ascertaining that Kapitonich had admitted her and shown her up, he
gave the old man a talking-to. The hall porter was doggedly silent,
but when Kornei told him he ought to be sent packing Kapitonich darted
up to him, and, shaking his hands in Kornei's face, began:
  "Oh yes, to be sure you'd not have let her in! After ten years'
service, and never a word but of kindness, and there you'd up and say,
'Be off, go along, get away with you!' Oh yes, you're a shrewd one
at politics, I dare say! You don't need to be taught how to swindle
the master, and to filch raccoon fur coats!"
  "Soldier!" said Kornei contemptuously, and he turned to the nurse
who was coming in. "Here, what do you think, Maria Efimovna: he let
her in without a word to anyone," Kornei said addressing her.
"Alexei Alexandrovich will be down immediately- and will go into the
nursery!"
  "A pretty business, a pretty business!" said the nurse, "You, Kornei
Vassilyevich- you'd best detain the master some way or other, while
I'll run and get her away somehow. A pretty business!"
  When the nurse went into the nursery, Seriozha was telling his
mother how he and Nadinka had had a fall in tobogganing downhill,
and had turned over three times. She was listening to the sound of his
voice, watching his face and the play of expression on it, touching
his hand, but she did not follow what he was saying. She must go,
she must leave him- this was the only thing she was thinking and
feeling. She heard the steps of Vassilii Lukich coming up to the
door and coughing; she heard, too, the steps of the nurse as she
came near; but she sat like one turned to stone, incapable of speaking
or rising.
  "Mistress, darling!" began the nurse, going up to Anna and kissing
her hands and shoulders. "God has brought joy indeed to our boy on his
birthday. You haven't changed one bit."
  "Oh, nurse dear, I didn't know you were in the house," said Anna,
rousing herself for a moment.
  "I'm not living here- I'm living with my daughter. I came for the
birthday, Anna Arkadyevna, darling!"
  The nurse suddenly burst into tears, and fell to kissing her hand
again.
  Seriozha, with radiant eyes and smiles, holding his mother by one
hand and his nurse by the other, pattered on the rug with his chubby
little bare feet. The tenderness shown by his beloved nurse to his
mother threw him into an ecstasy.
  "Mother! She often comes to see me, and when she comes..." he was
beginning, but he stopped, noticing that the nurse was saying
something in a whisper to his mother, and that in his mother's face
there was a look of dread and something like shame, which was so
strangely unbecoming to her.
  She went up to him.
  "My sweet!" she said.
  She could not say good-by, but the expression on her face said it,
and he understood. "Darling, darling Kootik!" she used the name by
which she had called him when he was little "you won't forget me?
You..." but she could not say more.
  How often afterward she thought of words she might have said. But
now she did not know what to say, and could say nothing. But
Seriozha knew all she wanted to say to him. He understood that she was
unhappy and loved him. He understood even what the nurse had
whispered. He had caught the words "Always at nine o'clock," and he
knew that this was said of his father, and that his father and
mother could not meet. That he understood, but one thing he could
not understand- why there should be a look of dread and shame in her
face?... She was not at fault, but she was afraid of his father and
ashamed of something. He would have liked to put a question that would
have set at rest this doubt, but he did not dare; he saw that she
was miserable, and he pitied her. Silently he pressed close to her and
whispered:
  "Don't go yet. He won't come just yet."
  The mother held him away from her to see whether he was thinking,
what he said to her, and in his frightened face she read not only that
he was speaking of his father, but, as it were, asking her what he
ought to think about his father.
  "Seriozha, my darling," she said, "love him; he's better and
kinder than I am, and I have done him wrong. When you grow up you will
judge."
  "There's no one better than you!..." he cried in despair through his
tears, and, clutching her by the shoulders, he began squeezing her
with all his force to him, his arms trembling with the strain.
  "My sweet, my little one!" said Anna, and she cried as weakly and
childishly as he.
  At that moment the door opened; Vassilii Lukich came in. At the
other door there was the sound of steps, and the nurse in a scared
whisper said, "He's coming," and gave Anna her hat.
  Seriozha sank on the bed and sobbed, hiding his face in his hands.
Anna removed his hands, once more kissed his wet face, and with
rapid steps went to the door. Alexei Alexandrovich walked in,
meeting her. Seeing her, he stopped short and bowed his head.
  Although she had just said he was better and kinder than she, in the
rapid glance she flung at him, taking in his whole figure in all its
details, feelings of repulsion and hatred for him, and jealousy for
her son, took possession of her. With a swift gesture she put down her
veil, and, quickening her pace, almost ran out of the room.
  She had not time to undo, and so carried back with her, the parcel
of toys she had chosen the day before in a toyshop with such love
and sorrow.
                             XXXI.

  Intensely as Anna had longed to see her son, and long as she had
been thinking of it and preparing herself for it, she had not in the
least expected that seeing him would affect her so deeply. On
getting back to her lonely rooms in the hotel she could not for a long
while understand why she was there. "Yes, it's all over, and I am
again alone," she said to herself, and, without taking off her hat she
sat down in a low chair by the hearth. Fixing her eyes on a bronze
clock standing on a table between the windows, she tried to think.
  The French maid brought from abroad came in to suggest she should
dress. She gazed at her wonderingly and said, "Later on." A footman
offered her coffee. "Later on," she said.
  The Italian nurse, after taking the baby out in her best, came in
with her, and brought her to Anna. The plump, well-fed little baby, on
seeing her mother, as she always did, held out her chubby little
hands, and with a smile on her toothless mouth, began, like a fish
with a float, bobbing her fingers up and down the starched folds of
her embroidered pinafore, making them rustle. It was impossible not to
smile, not to kiss the baby, impossible not to hold out a finger for
her to clutch, crowing and prancing all over; impossible not to
offer her a lip which she sucked into her little mouth by way of a
kiss. And all this Anna did, and took her in her arms and made her
dance, and kissed her fresh little cheek and bare little elbows; but
at the sight of this child it was plainer than ever to her that the
feeling she had for her could not be called love in comparison with
what she felt for Seriozha. Everything in this baby was charming,
but for some reason all this did not go deep to her heart. On her
first child, though the child of an unloved father, had been
concentrated all the love that had never found satisfaction. Her
baby girl had been born in the most painful circumstances and had
not had a hundredth part of the care and thought which had been
concentrated on her first child. Besides, in the little girl
everything was still in the future, while Seriozha was by now almost a
personality, and a personality dearly loved. In him there was a
conflict of thoughts, and of feelings; he understood her, he loved
her, he judged her, she thought, recalling his words and his eyes. And
she was forever- not physically only but spiritually- divided from
him, and it was impossible to set this right.
  She gave the baby back to the nurse, let her go, and opened the
locket in which there was Seriozha's portrait when he was almost of
the same age as the girl. She got up, and, taking off her hat, took up
from a little table an album in which there were photographs of her
son at different ages. She wanted to compare them, and began taking
them out of the album. She took them all out except one, the latest
and best photograph. In it he was in a white smock, sitting astride
a chair, with frowning eyes and smiling lips. It was his best, most
singular expression. With her little supple hands, her white, delicate
fingers, that moved with a peculiar intensity today, she pulled at a
corner of the photograph, but the photograph had caught somewhere
and she could not get it out. There was no paper knife on the table,
and, pulling out the photograph that was next to her son's (it was a
photograph of Vronsky taken at Rome in a round hat and with long
hair), she used it to push out her son's photograph. "Oh, here he is!"
she said, glancing at the portrait of Vronsky, and she suddenly
recalled that he was the cause of her present misery. She had not once
thought of him all the morning. But now, coming all at once upon
that manly, noble face, so familiar and so dear to her, she felt a
sudden rush of love for him.
  "But where is he? How is it he leaves me alone in my misery?" she
thought all at once with a feeling of reproach, forgetting she had
herself kept from him everything concerning her son. She sent to ask
him to come to her immediately; with a throbbing heart she awaited
him, rehearsing to herself the words in which she would tell him
all, and the expressions of love with which he would console her.
The messenger returned with the answer that he had a visitor with him,
but that he would come immediately, and that he asked whether she
would let him bring with him Prince Iashvin, who had just arrived in
Peterburg. "He's not coming alone, and since dinner yesterday he has
not seen me," she thought; "he's not coming so that I could tell him
everything, but coming with Iashvin." And all at once a strange idea
came to her: What if he had ceased to love her?
  And going over the events of the last few days, it seemed to her
that she saw in everything a confirmation of this terrible idea: the
fact that he had not dined at home yesterday, and the fact that he had
insisted on their taking separate sets of rooms at Peterburg, and that
even now he was not coming to her alone, as though he were trying to
avoid meeting her face to face.
  "But he ought to tell me so. I must know that it is so. If I knew
it, then I'd know what I should do," she said to herself, utterly
unable to picture to herself the position she would be in if she
were convinced of his not caring for her. She thought he had ceased to
love her, she felt close upon despair, and consequently she felt
exceptionally alert. She rang for her maid and went to her dressing
room. As she dressed, she took more care over her appearance than
she had done all these days, as though he might, if he had grown
cold to her, fall in love with her again because she had dressed and
arranged her hair in the way most becoming to her.
  She heard the bell ring before she was ready.
  When she went into the drawing room it was not he, but Iashvin,
who met her eyes. Vronsky was looking through the photographs of her
son, which she had forgotten on the table, and he made no haste to
look round at her.
  "We have met already," she said, putting her little hand into the
huge hand of Iashvin, whose bashfulness was so queerly out of
keeping with his immense frame and coarse face. "We met last year at
the races. Give them to me," she said, with a rapid movement snatching
from Vronsky the photographs of her son, and glancing significantly at
him with flashing eyes. "Were the races good this year? Instead of
them I saw the races in the Corso in Rome. But you don't care for life
abroad," she said with a cordial smile. "I know you and all your
tastes, though I have seen so little of you."
  "I'm awfully sorry for that, for my tastes are mostly bad," said
Iashvin, gnawing at his left mustache.
  Having talked a little while, and noticing that Vronsky glanced at
the clock, Iashvin asked her whether she would be staying much
longer in Peterburg, and unbending his huge figure, reached after
his cap.
  "Not long, I think," she said hesitatingly, glancing at Vronsky.
  "So then we shan't meet again?" said Iashvin getting up and
turning to Vronsky. "Where do you have your dinner?"
  "Come and dine with me," said Anna resolutely, angry it seemed
with herself for her embarrassment, but flushing as she always did
when she defined her position before a fresh person. "The dinner
here is not good, but at least you will see him. There is no one of
his old friends in the regiment Alexei cares for as he does for you."
  "Delighted," said Iashvin with a smile, from which Vronsky could see
that he liked Anna very much.
  Iashvin said good-by, and went away; Vronsky stayed behind.
  "Are you going too?" she said to him.
  "I'm late already," he answered. "Run along! I'll catch up in a
moment," he called to Iashvin.
  She took him by the hand, and without taking her eyes off him, gazed
at him while she ransacked her mind for the words to say that would
keep him.
  "Wait a minute, there's something I want to say to you," and
taking his broad hand she pressed it on her neck. "Oh, was it right my
asking him to dinner?"
  "You did quite right," he said with a serene smile that showed his
close teeth, and he kissed her hand.
  "Alexei, you have not changed to me?" she said, pressing his hand in
both of hers. "Alexei, I am miserable here. When are we going away?"
  "Soon, soon. You wouldn't believe how disagreeable our way of living
here is to me too," he said, and he drew away his hand.
  "Well, go, go!" she said, offended, and she walked quickly away from
him.
                             XXXII.

  When Vronsky returned home, Anna was not yet home. Soon after he had
left, some lady, so they told him, had come to see her, and she had
gone out with her. That she had gone out without leaving word where
she was going, that she had not yet come back, and that all the
morning she had been going about somewhere without a word to him-
all this, together with the strange look of excitement in her face
in the morning, and the recollection of the hostile tone with which
she had before Iashvin almost snatched her son's photographs out of
his hands, made him serious. He decided he absolutely must speak
openly with her. And he waited for her in her drawing room. But Anna
did not return alone, but brought with her her old unmarried aunt,
Princess Oblonskaia. This was the lady who had come in the morning,
and with whom Anna had gone out shopping. Anna appeared not to
notice Vronsky's worried and inquiring expression, and began a
lively account of her morning's shopping. He saw that there was
something working within her; in her flashing eyes, when they rested
for a moment on him, there was an intense concentration, and in her
words and movements there was that nervous rapidity and grace which,
during the early period of their intimacy, had so fascinated him,
but which now so disturbed and alarmed him.
  The dinner was laid for four. All were gathered together and about
to go into the little dining room when Tushkevich made his
appearance with a message from Princess Betsy. Princess Betsy begged
her to excuse her not having come to say good-by; she had been
indisposed, but begged Anna to come to her between half-past six and
half-past eight o'clock. Vronsky glanced at Anna at the precise
limit of time, so suggestive of steps having been taken that she
should meet no one; but Anna appeared not to notice it.
  "Very sorry that I can't come just between half-past six and
nine," she said with a faint smile.
  "The Princess will be very sorry."
  "And so shall I."
  "You're going, no doubt, to hear Patti?" said Tushkevich.
  "Patti? You give me an idea. I would go if it were possible to get a
box."
  "I can get one," Tushkevich offered his services.
  "I should be very, very grateful to you," said Anna. "But won't
you dine with us?"
  Vronsky gave a hardly perceptible shrug. He was at a complete loss
to understand what Anna was about. What had she brought the old
Princess Oblonskaia home for, what had she made Tushkevich stay to
dinner for, and, most amazing of all, why was she sending him for a
box? Could she possibly think in her position of going to Patti's
benefit, where all the circle of her acquaintances would be? He looked
at her with serious eyes, but she responded with that defiant,
half-mirthful, half-desperate look, the meaning of which he could
not comprehend. At dinner Anna was in aggressively high spirits- she
almost flirted both with Tushkevich and with Iashvin. When they got up
from dinner and Tushkevich had gone to get a box at the opera, Iashvin
went to smoke, and Vronsky went down with him to his own rooms.
After sitting there for some time he ran upstairs. Anna was already
dressed in a low-necked gown of light silk and velvet that she had had
made in Paris, and with costly white lace on her head, framing her
face, and particularly becoming, showing up her dazzling beauty.
  "Are you really going to the theater?" he said, trying not to look
at her.
  "Why do you ask with such alarm?" she said, wounded again at his not
looking at her. "Why shouldn't I go?"
  She appeared not to understand the meaning of his words.
  "Oh, of course there's no reason whatever," he said frowning.
  "That's just what I say," she said, willfully refusing to see the
irony of his tone, and quietly turning back her long, perfumed glove.
  "Anna, for God's sake! What is the matter with you?" he said,
watching her exactly as once her husband had done.
  "I don't understand what you are asking."
  "You know that it's out of the question to go."
  "Why so? I'm not going alone. Princess Varvara has gone to dress-
she is going with me."
  He shrugged his shoulders with an air of perplexity and despair.
  "But do you mean to say you don't know?..." he began.
  "But I don't care to know!" she almost shrieked. "I don't care to.
Do I regret what I have done? No, no, no! If it were all to do again
from the beginning, it would be the same. For us, for you and for
me, there is only one thing that matters, whether we love each
other. Other people we need not consider. Why are we living here apart
and not seeing each other? Why can't I go? I love you, and I don't
care for anything," she said in Russian, glancing at him with a
peculiar, obscure for him, gleam in her eyes, "if you have not changed
to me.... Why don't you look at me?"
  He looked at her. He saw all the beauty of her face and full
dress, always so becoming to her. But now her beauty and elegance were
just what irritated him.
  "My feeling cannot change, you know, but I beg you, I entreat
you," he said again in French, with a note of tender supplication in
his voice, but with coldness in his eyes.
  She did not hear his words, but she saw the coldness of his eyes,
and answered with irritation:
  "And I beg you to explain why I should not go."
  "Because it might cause you..." He hesitated.
  "I don't understand. Iashvin n'est compromettant, and Princess
Varvara is no worse than others. Oh, here she is!"
                             XXXIII.

  Vronsky for the first time experienced a feeling of anger against
Anna, almost a hatred for her intentional refusal to understand her
own position. This feeling was aggravated by his being unable to
tell her plainly the cause of his anger. If he had told her directly
what he was thinking, he would have said: "In that dress, with a
Princess only too well known to everyone, to show yourself at the
theater is equivalent not merely to acknowledging your position as a
fallen woman, but is flinging down a challenge to society- that is
to say, cutting yourself off from it forever."
  He could not say that to her. "But how can she fail to see it, and
what is going on within her?" he said to himself He felt at the same
time that his respect for her was diminished while his sense of her
beauty was intensified.
  He went back scowling to his rooms, and, sitting down beside
Iashvin, who, with his long legs stretched out on a chair, was
drinking cognac and Seltzer water, he ordered a glass of the same
for himself.
  "You were talking of Lankovsky's Powerful. That's a fine horse,
and I would advise you to buy him," said Iashvin, glancing at his
comrade's gloomy face. "His hindquarters aren't quite first-rate,
but the legs and head- one couldn't wish for anything better."
  "I think I will take him," answered Vronsky.
  Their conversation about horses interested him, but he did not for
an instant forget Anna, and could not help listening to the sound of
steps in the corridor and looking at the clock on the chimney piece.
  "Anna Arkadyevna gave orders to announce that she has gone to the
theater."
  Iashvin, tipping another glass of cognac into the bubbling water,
drank it and got up, buttoning his coat.
  "Well, let's go," he said, faintly smiling under his mustache, and
showing by this smile that he knew the cause of Vronsky's
gloominess, and did not attach any significance to it.
  "I'm not going," Vronsky answered gloomily.
  "Well, I must- I promised to. Good-by then. If you do, come to the
stalls; you can take Krassinsky's stall," added Iashvin as he went
out.
  "No, I'm busy."
  "A wife is a care, but it's worse when she's not a wife," thought
Iashvin, as he walked out of the hotel.
  Vronsky, left alone, got up from his chair and began pacing up and
down the room.
  "And what's today? The fourth series.... Iegor and his wife are
there, and my mother, most likely. Of course all Peterburg's there.
Now she's gone in, taken off her cloak and come into the glare.
Tushkevich, Iashvin, Princess Varvara," he pictured them to
himself.... "What about me? Either that I'm frightened, or have
given up to Tushkevich the right to protect her? From every point of
view- stupid, stupid!... And why is she putting me in such a
position?" he said with a gesture of despair.
  With that gesture he knocked against the table, on which there was
standing the Seltzer water and the decanter of cognac, and almost
upset it. He tried to catch it, let it slip, and angrily kicked the
table over and rang.
  "If you care to be in my service," he said to the valet who came in,
"you had better remember your duties. This shouldn't be here. You
ought to have cleared away."
  The valet, conscious of his own innocence, would have defended
himself, but, glancing at his master, he saw from his face that the
only thing to do was to be silent, and hurriedly threading his way
in and out, dropped down on the carpet and began gathering up the
whole and broken glasses and bottles.
  "That's not your duty; send the waiter to clear away, and get my
dress coat out."

  Vronsky arrived at the theater at half-past eight The performance
was in full swing. The little old boxkeeper, recognizing Vronsky as he
helped him off with his fur coat, called him "Your Excellency," and
suggested he should not take a check but should simply call Fiodor. In
the brightly lighted corridor there was no one but the box opener
and two footmen with fur cloaks on their arms listening at the
doors. Through the closed doors came the sounds of the discreet
staccato accompaniment of the orchestra, and a single female voice
rendering distinctly a musical phrase. The door opened to let the
box opener slip through, and the phrase drawing to the end reached
Vronsky's hearing clearly. But the doors were closed again at once,
and Vronsky did not hear the end of the phrase and the cadence of
the accompaniment, though he knew from the thunder of applause that it
was over. When he entered the hall, brilliantly lighted with
chandeliers and gas jets, the noise was still going on. On the stage
the singer, bowing and smiling, flashing with bare shoulders and
with diamonds, was, with the help of the tenor who had given her his
arm, gathering up the bouquets that were clumsily flying over the
footlights. Then she went up to a gentleman with glossy pomaded hair
parted down the middle, who was stretching across the footlights
holding out something to her, and all the public in the stalls as well
as in the boxes was in excitement, craning forward, shouting and
clapping. The conductor in his high chair assisted in passing the
offering, and straightened his white tie. Vronsky walked into the
middle of the stalls, and, standing still, began looking about him.
That day less than ever was his attention turned upon the familiar,
habitual surroundings, the stage, the noise, all the familiar,
uninteresting, particolored herd of spectators in the packed theater.
  There were, as always, the same ladies of some sort with officers of
some sort in the back of the boxes; the same gaily dressed women-
God knows who- and uniforms and black coats; the same dirty crowd in
the upper gallery, and among the crowd, in the boxes and in the
front rows, were some forty of the real people, men and women. And
to those oases Vronsky at once directed his attention, and with them
he entered at once into relation.
  The act was over when he went in, and so he did not go straight to
his brother's box, but going up to the first row of stalls stopped
at the footlights with Serpukhovskoy, who, standing with one knee,
raised and his heel on the footlights, caught sight of him in the
distance and beckoned to him, smiling.
  Vronsky had not yet seen Anna. He purposely avoided looking in her
direction. But he knew by the direction of people's eyes where she
was. He looked round discreetly, but he was not seeking her; expecting
the worst, his eyes sought for Alexei Alexandrovich. To his relief
Alexei Alexandrovich was not in the theater that evening.
  "How little of the military man there is left in you!" Serpukhovskoy
was saying to him. "A diplomat, an artist, something of that sort, one
would say."
  "Yes, it was like going back home when I put on a dress coat,"
answered Vronsky, smiling and slowly taking out his opera glasses.
  "Well, I'll own I envy you there. When I come back from abroad and
put on this," he touched his shoulder knot, "I regret my freedom."
  Serpukhovskoy had long given up all hope of Vronsky's career, but he
liked him as before, and was now particularly cordial to him.
  "What a pity you were not in time for the first act!"
  Vronsky, listening with half an ear, moved his opera glasses from
the stalls and scanned the boxes. Near a lady in a turban and a bald
old man, who seemed to blink angrily in the moving opera glasses,
Vronsky suddenly caught sight of Anna's head, proud, strikingly
beautiful, and smiling in its frame of lace. She was in the fifth box,
twenty paces from him. She was sitting in front, and, slightly
turning, was saying something to Iashvin. The setting of her head on
her handsome, broad shoulders, and the restrained excitement and
brilliance of her eyes and her whole face reminded him of her just
as he had seen her at the ball in Moscow. But he felt utterly
different toward her beauty now. In his feeling for her now there
was no element of mystery, and so her beauty, though it attracted
him even more intensely than before, gave him now a sense of injury.
She was not looking in his direction, but Vronsky felt that she had
seen him already.
  When Vronsky turned the opera glasses again in that direction, he
noticed that Princess Varvara was particularly red, and kept
laughing unnaturally and looking round at the next box. Anna,
folding her fan and tapping it on the red velvet, was gazing away
and did not see, and obviously did not wish to see, what was taking
place in the next box. Iashvin's face wore the expression which was
common when he was losing at cards. Scowling, he sucked the left tip
of his mustache further and further into his mouth, and cast
sidelong glances at the next box.
  In that box on the left were the Kartassovs. Vronsky knew them,
and knew that Anna was acquainted with them. Madame Kartassova, a thin
little woman, was standing up in her box, and, her back turned upon
Anna, she was putting on a mantle that her husband was holding for
her. Her face was pale and angry, and she was talking excitedly.
Kartassov, a fat, bald man, was continually looking round at Anna,
while he attempted to soothe his wife. When the wife had gone out, the
husband lingered a long while, and tried to catch Anna's eye,
obviously anxious to bow to her. But Anna, with unmistakable
intention, avoided noticing him, and talked to Iashvin, whose
cropped head was bent down to her. Kartassov went out without making
his salutation, and the box was left empty.
  Vronsky could not understand exactly what had passed between the
Kartassovs and Anna, but he saw that something humiliating for Anna
had happened. He knew this both from what he had seen, and most of all
from the face of Anna, who, he could see, was taxing every nerve to
carry through the part she had taken up. And in maintaining this
attitude of external composure she was completely successful. Anyone
who did not know her and her circle, who had not heard all the
utterances of the women expressive of commiseration, indignation and
amazement, that she should show herself in society, and show herself
so conspicuously with her lace and her beauty, would have admired
the serenity and loveliness of this woman without a suspicion that she
was undergoing the sensations of a man in the stocks.
  Knowing that something had happened, but not knowing precisely what,
Vronsky felt a thrill of agonizing anxiety, and hoping to find out
something, he went toward his brother's box. Purposely choosing the
way round farthest from Anna's box, he jostled as he came out
against the colonel of his old regiment, talking to two acquaintances.
Vronsky heard the name of Karenin, and noticed how the colonel
hastened to address Vronsky loudly by name, with a meaning glance at
his companions.
  "Ah, Vronsky! When are you coming to the regiment? We can't let
you off without a supper. You're our- one of the most thorough,"
said the colonel of his regiment.
  "I can't stop, awfully sorry, another time," said Vronsky, and he
ran upstairs toward his brother's box.
  The old countess, Vronsky's mother, with her steel-gray curls, was
in his brother's box. Varia with the young Princess Sorokina met him
in the corridor.
  Leaving the Princess Sorokina with her mother, Varia held out her
hand to her brother-in-law, and began immediately to speak of what
interested him. She was more excited than he had ever seen her.
  "I think it's mean and hateful, and Madame Kartassova had no right
to do it. Madame Karenina..." she began.
  "But what is it? I don't know."
  "What? You haven't heard?"
  "You know I should be the last person to hear of it."
  "There isn't a more spiteful creature than that Madame Kartassova!"
  "But what did she do?"
  "My husband told me.... She has insulted Madame Karenina. Her
husband began talking to her across the box, and Madame Kartassova
made a scene. She said something aloud, they say, something insulting,
and went away."
  "Count, your maman is asking for you," said the young Princess
Sorokina, peeping out of the door of the box.
  "I've been expecting you all the while," said his mother, smiling
sarcastically. "You were nowhere to be seen."
  Her son saw that she could not suppress a smile of delight.
  "Good evening, maman. I have come to you," he said coldly.
  "Why aren't you going to faire la cour a Madame Karenina?" she
went on, when Princess Sorokina had moved away. "Elle fait
sensation. On oublie la Patti pour elle."
  "Maman, I have asked you not to say anything to me of that," he
answered, scowling.
  "I'm only saying what everyone's saying."
  Vronsky made no reply, and saying a few words to Princess
Sorokina, he went away. At the door he met his brother.
  "Ah, Alexei!" said his brother. "How disgusting! Idiot of a woman,
nothing else.... I wanted to go straight to her. Let's go together."
  Vronsky did not hear him. With rapid steps he went downstairs; he
felt that he must do something, but he did not know what. Anger with
her for having put herself and him in such a false position,
together with pity for her suffering, filled his heart. He went
down, and made straight for Anna's box. At her box stood Stremov,
talking to her.
  "There are no more tenors. Le moule en est brise!"
  Vronsky bowed to her and stopped to greet Stremov.
  "You came in late, I think, and have missed the best song," Anna
said to Vronsky, glancing ironically, he thought, at him.
  "I am a poor judge of music," he said, looking sternly at her.
  "Like Prince Iashvin," she said smiling, "who considers that Patti
sings too loud.- Thank you," she said, her little hand in its long
glove taking the playbill Vronsky picked up, and suddenly at that
instant her lovely face quivered. She got up and went into the
interior of the box.
  Noticing in the next act that her box was empty, Vronsky, rousing
many an indignant "Hush!" in the silent audience, went out in the
middle of a solo and drove home.
  Anna was already at home. When Vronsky went up to her, she was in
the same dress she had worn at the theater. She was sitting in the
first armchair against the wall, looking straight before her. She
looked at him, and at once resumed her former position.
  "Anna," he said.
  "You, you are to blame for everything!" she cried, with tears of
despair and hatred in her voice, getting up.
  "I begged, I implored you not to go; I knew it would be
unpleasant..."
  "Unpleasant?" she cried. "Hideous! As long as I live I shall never
forget it. She said it was a disgrace to sit beside me."
  "A silly woman's chatter," he said, "but why risk it, why
provoke?..."
  "I hate your calm. You ought not to have brought me to this. If
you had loved me..."
  "Anna! How does the question of my love come in?..."
  "Oh, if you loved me, as I love, if you were tortured as I am..."
she said, looking at him with an expression of terror.
  He was sorry for her, and angry notwithstanding. He assured her of
his love because he saw that this was the only means of soothing
her, and he did not reproach her in words, but in his heart he
reproached her.
  And the asseverations of his love, which seemed to him so trivial
that he was ashamed to utter them, she drank in eagerly, and gradually
became calmer. The next day, completely reconciled, they left for
the country.
                         PART SIX

                             I.

  Darya Alexandrovna spent the summer with her children at Pokrovskoe,
at her sister Kitty Levin's. The house on her own estate was quite
in ruins, and Levin and his wife had persuaded her to spend the summer
with them. Stepan Arkadyevich greatly approved of the arrangement.
He said he was very sorry his official duties prevented him from
spending the summer in the country with his family, which would have
been the greatest happiness for him; and remaining in Moscow, he
came down to the country from time to time for a day or two. Besides
the Oblonskys, with all their children and their governess, the old
Princess, too, came to stay that summer with the Levins, as she
considered it her duty to watch over her inexperienced daughter in her
interesting condition. Moreover, Varenka, Kitty's friend abroad,
kept her promise to come to Kitty when she was married, and stayed
with her friend. All of these were friends or relations of Levin's
wife. And though he liked them all, he rather regretted his own
Levin world and ways, which was smothered by this influx of the
"Shcherbatsky element," as he called it to himself. Of his own
relations there stayed with him only Sergei Ivanovich, but he too
was a man of the Koznishev and not the Levin stamp, so that the
Levin spirit was utterly obliterated.
  In the Levins' house, so long deserted, there were now so many
people that almost all the rooms were occupied, and almost every day
it happened that the old Princess, sitting down to table, counted them
all over, and put the thirteenth grandson or granddaughter at a
separate table. And Kitty, with her careful housekeeping, had no
little trouble to get all the chickens, turkeys and geese, of which so
many were needed to satisfy the summer appetites of the visitors and
children.
  The whole family were sitting at dinner. Dolly's children, with
their governess and Varenka, were making plans for going to look for
mushrooms. Sergei Ivanovich, who was looked up to by all the party for
his intellect and learning, with a respect that almost amounted to
awe, surprised everyone by joining in the conversation about
mushrooms.
  "Take me with you. I am very fond of picking mushrooms," he said,
looking at Varenka; "I think it's a very fine occupation."
  "Oh, we shall be delighted," answered Varenka coloring. Kitty
exchanged meaning glances with Dolly. The proposal of the learned
and intellectual Sergei Ivanovich to go looking for mushrooms with
Varenka confirmed certain theories of Kitty's with which her mind
had been very busy of late. She made haste to address some remark to
her mother, so that her look should not be noticed. After dinner
Sergei Ivanovich sat with his cup of coffee at the drawing-room
window, and while he took part in a conversation he had begun with his
brother, he watched the door through which the children would start on
the mushroom-picking expedition. Levin was sitting on the window
sill near his brother.
  Kitty stood beside her husband, evidently awaiting the end of a
conversation that had no interest for her, in order to tell him
something.
  "You have changed in many respects since your marriage, and for
the better," said Sergei Ivanovich, smiling to Kitty, and obviously
little interested in the conversation, "but you have remained true
to your passion for defending the most paradoxical theories."
  "Katia, it's not good for you to stand," her husband said to her,
drawing up a chair for her and looking significantly at her.
  "Oh, and there's no time either," added Sergei Ivanovich, seeing the
children running out.
  At the head of them all Tania galloped sideways, in her tightly
drawn stockings, and waving a basket and Sergei Ivanovich's hat, she
ran straight up to him.
  Boldly running up to Sergei Ivanovich with smiling eyes, so like her
father's fine eyes, she handed him his hat and made as though she
would put it on for him, softening her freedom by a shy and friendly
smile.
  "Varenka's waiting," she said, carefully putting his hat on,
seeing from Sergei Ivanovich's smile that she might do so.
  Varenka was standing at the door, dressed in a yellow print gown,
with a white kerchief on her head.
  "I'm coming, I'm coming, Varvara Andreevna," said Sergei
Ivanovich, finishing his cup of coffee, and putting into their
separate pockets his handkerchief and cigar case.
  "And how sweet my Varenka is! Eh?" said Kitty to her husband, as
soon as Sergei Ivanovich rose. She spoke so that Sergei Ivanovich
could hear, and it was clear that she meant him to do so. "And how
good-looking she is- such a refined beauty! Varenka!" Kitty shouted.
"Shall you be in the mill forest? We'll come out to you."
  "You certainly forget your condition, Kitty," said the old Princess,
hurriedly coming out at the door. "You mustn't shout like that."
  Varenka, hearing Kitty's voice and her mother's reprimand, went with
light, rapid steps up to Kitty. The rapidity of her movement, her
flushed and eager face, everything betrayed that something out of
the common was going on in her. Kitty knew what this thing was and had
been watching her intently. She called Varenka at that moment merely
in order mentally to give her a blessing for the important event
which, as Kitty fancied, was bound to come to pass that day after
dinner in the forest.
  "Varenka, I should be very happy if a certain something were to
happen," she whispered as she kissed her.
  "And are you coming with us?" Varenka said to Levin in confusion,
pretending not to have heard what had been said.
  "I am coming, but only as far as the threshing floor, and there I
shall stop."
  "Why, what do you want there?" said Kitty.
  "I must go to have a look at the new wagons, and to make my
calculations," said Levin; "and where will you be?"
  "On the terrace."
                             II.

  On the terrace were assembled all the ladies of the party. They
always liked sitting there after dinner, and that day they had work to
do there too. Besides the sewing of baby's chemises and knitting of
swaddles, with which all of them were busy, that afternoon jam was
being made on the terrace by a method new to Agathya Mikhailovna,
without the addition of water. Kitty had introduced this new method,
which had been in use in her home. Agathya Mikhailovna, to whom the
task of jam making had always been intrusted, considering that what
had been done in the Levin household could not be amiss, had
nevertheless put water with the strawberries, maintaining that the jam
could not be made without it. She had been caught in the act, and
was now making raspberry jam before everyone, and it was to be
proved to her conclusively that jam could be very well made without
water.
  Agathya Mikhailovna, her face heated and angry, her hair untidy, and
her thin arms bare to the elbows, was swaying the preserving pan in
a circular motion over the charcoal stove, looking darkly at the
raspberries and devoutly hoping they would stick and not cook
properly. The Princess, conscious that Agathya Mikhailovna's wrath
must be chiefly directed against her, as the person responsible for
the raspberry jam making, tried to appear to be absorbed in other
things and not interested in the raspberries, talking of other
matters, but cast stealthy glances in the direction of the stove.
  "I always buy my maids' dresses myself, at the bargain sale," the
Princess said, continuing the previous conversation. "Isn't it time to
skim it, my dear?" she added, addressing Agathya Mikhailovna. "There's
not the slightest need for you to do it, and it's hot for you," she
said, stopping Kitty.
  "I'll do it," said Dolly, and, getting up, she carefully passed
the spoon over the frothing sugar, and from time to time shook off the
clinging jam from the spoon by knocking it on a plate that was covered
with yellow-red scum and blood-colored syrup. "How they'll lick this
at teatime!" she thought of her children, remembering how she
herself as a child had wondered how it was the grown-up people did not
eat what was best of all- the scum of the jam.
  "Stiva says it's much better to give money," Dolly took up meanwhile
the weighty subject under discussion- of what presents should be
made to servants. "But..."
  "Money's out of the question!" the Princess and Kitty exclaimed with
one voice. "They appreciate a present..."
  "Well, last year, for instance, I bought our Matriona Semionovna,
not a poplin, but something of that sort," said the Princess.
  "I remember she was wearing it on your name day."
  "A charming pattern- so simple and refined- I should have liked it
myself, if she hadn't had it. Something like Varenka's. So pretty
and inexpensive."
  "Well, now I think it's done," said Dolly, dropping the syrup from
the spoon.
  "When it sets as it drops, it's ready. Cook it a little longer,
Agathya Mikhailovna."
  "The flies!" said Agathya Mikhailovna angrily. "It'll be just the
same," she added.
  "Ah! How sweet it is! Don't frighten it!" Kitty said suddenly,
looking at a sparrow that had settled on the step and was pecking at
the center of a raspberry.
  "Yes, but you keep a little further from the stove," said her
mother.
  "A propos de Varenka," said Kitty, speaking in French, as they had
been doing all the while, so that Agathya Mikhailovna should not
understand them, "you know, maman, I somehow expect things to be
settled today. You know what I mean. How splendid it would be!"
  "But what a famous matchmaker she is!" said Dolly. "How carefully
and cleverly she throws them together!..."
  "No- tell me, mamma, what do you think?"
  "Why, what is one to think? He" ('he' meant Sergei Ivanovich) "might
at any time have been one of the best matches in Russia; now, of
course, he's not quite a young man, still I know ever so many girls
would be glad to marry him, even now.... She's a very nice girl, but
he might..."
  "Oh, no, mamma, do understand why, for him and for her too,
nothing better could be imagined. In the first place, she's charming!"
said Kitty, crooking one of her fingers.
  "He thinks her very attractive, that's certain," assented Dolly.
  "Then he occupies such a position in society that he has no need
to look for either fortune or position in his wife. All he needs is
a good, sweet wife- a restful one."
  "Well, with her he would certainly be restful," Dolly assented.
  "Thirdly, that she should love him. And so it is... that is, it
would be so splendid!... I look forward to seeing them coming out of
the forest- and everything settled. I shall see at once by their eyes.
I should be so delighted! What do you think, Dolly?"
  "But don't excite yourself. It's not at all the thing for you to
be excited," said her mother.
  "Oh, I'm not excited, mamma. I fancy he will propose to her today."
  "Ah, that's so strange- how and when a man proposes!... There is a
sort of barrier, and all at once it's broken down," said Dolly,
smiling pensively and recalling her past with Stepan Arkadyevich.
  "Mamma, how did papa propose to you?" Kitty asked suddenly.
  "There was nothing out of the way- it was very simple," answered the
Princess, but her face beamed all over at the recollection.
  "Oh, but how was it? You loved him, at any rate, before you were
allowed to speak?"
  Kitty felt a peculiar pleasure in being able now to talk to her
mother on equal terms about those questions of such paramount interest
in a woman's life.
  "Of course I did; he had come to stay with us in the country."
  "But how was it settled between you, mamma?"
  "You imagine, I dare say, that you invented something quite new?
It's always just the same: it was settled by the eyes, by smiles..."
  "How well you said that, mamma! It's just by the eyes, by smiles
that it's done," Dolly assented.
  "But what words did he say?"
  "What did Kostia say to you?"
  "He wrote it in chalk. It was wonderful.... How long ago it
seems!" she said.
  And the three women all fell to musing on the same thing. Kitty
was the first to break the silence. She remembered all that last
winter before her marriage, and her passion for Vronsky.
  "There's one thing... that old love affair of Varenka's," she
said, a natural chain of ideas bringing her to this point. "I should
have liked to say something to Sergei Ivanovich, to prepare him.
They're all- all men, I mean,"- she added, "awfully jealous over our
past."
  "Not all," said Dolly. "You judge by your own husband. It makes
him miserable even now to remember Vronsky. Eh? that's true, isn't
it?"
  "Yes", Kitty answered, a pensive smile in her eyes.
  "But I really don't know," the mother put in in defense of her
motherly care of her daughter, "what there was in your past that could
worry him? That Vronsky paid you attentions- that happens to every
girl."
  "Oh, yes, but we didn't mean that," Kitty said, flushing a little
  "No, let me speak," her mother went on, "why, you yourself would not
let me have a talk with Vronsky. Don't you remember?"
  "Oh, mamma!" said Kitty, with an expression of suffering.
  "There's no keeping you young people in check nowadays.... Your
friendship could not have gone beyond what was suitable. I should
myself have called upon him to explain himself. But, my darling,
it's not right for you to be agitated. Please remember that, and
calm yourself."
  "I'm perfectly calm, maman."
  "How happy it was for Kitty that Anna came then," said Dolly, "and
how unhappy for her. It turned out quite the opposite," she said,
struck by her own ideas. "Then Anna was so happy, and Kitty thought
herself unhappy. Now it is just the opposite. I often think of her."
  "A fine person to think about! Horrid, repulsive woman- no heart,"
said her mother, who could not forget that Kitty had married not
Vronsky, but Levin.
  "What do you want to talk of it for?" Kitty said with annoyance.
"I never think about it, and I don't want to think of it.... And I
don't want to think of it," she said, catching the sound of her
husband's familiar step on the steps of the terrace.
  "What's that you don't want to think about?" inquired Levin,
coming onto the terrace.
  But no one answered him, and he did not repeat the question.
  "I'm sorry I've broken in on your feminine kingdom," he said,
looking round on everyone discontentedly, and perceiving that they had
been talking of something which they would not talk about before him.
  For a second he felt that he was sharing the feeling of Agathya
Mikhailovna, vexation at their making jam without water, and, on the
whole, at the outside, Shcherbatsky authority. He smiled, however, and
went up to Kitty.
  "Well, how are you?" he asked her, looking at her with the
expression with which everyone looked at her now.
  "Oh, very well," said Kitty, smiling, "and how have things gone with
you?"
  "The wagon held three times as much as the telega did. Well, are
we going for the children? I've ordered the horses to be put in."
  "What! You want to take Kitty in the wide droshky?" her mother
said reproachfully.
  "Yes- at walking pace, Princess."
  Levin never called the princess "maman" as men often do call their
mothers-in-law, and the Princess disliked his not doing so. But though
he liked and respected the Princess, Levin could not call her so
without a sense of profaning his feeling for his dead mother.
  "Come with us, maman," said Kitty.
  "I don't like to see such imprudence."
  "Well, I'll walk then, I'm so well." Kitty got up and went to her
husband and took his hand.
  "You may be well, but everything in moderation," said the Princess.
  "Well, Agathya Mikhailovna, is the jam done?" said Levin, smiling to
Agathya Mikhailovna, and trying to cheer her up. "Is it all right in
the new way?"
  "I suppose it's all right. According to our notions it's boiled
too long."
  "It'll be all the better, Agathya Mikhailovna, it won't turn sour,
even though the ice in our icehouse has begun to melt already, so that
we've no cool place to store it," said Kitty, at once divining her
husband's motive, and addressing the old housekeeper with the same
feeling; "but your pickles are so good, that mamma says she never
tasted any like them," she added, smiling, and putting her kerchief
straight.
  Agathya Mikhailovna looked sulkily at Kitty.
  "You needn't try to console me, mistress. I need only to look at you
with him, and I feel happy," she said, and something in the rough
familiarity of that with him touched Kitty.
  "Come along with us to look for mushrooms, you will show us the best
places."
  Agathya Mikhailovna smiled and shook her head, as though to say:
"I would even like to be angry with you, but I can't."
  "Do it, please, according to my recipe," said the Princess; "put
some paper over the jam, and moisten it with a little rum, and, even
without ice, it will never grow moldy."
                             III.

  Kitty was particularly glad of a chance of being alone with her
husband, for she had noticed the shade of mortification that had
passed over his face- always so quick to reflect every feeling- at the
moment when he had come onto the terrace and asked what they were
talking of, and had got no answer.
  When they had set off on foot ahead of the others, and had gotten
out of sight of the house onto the beaten, dusty road, sprinkled
with ears of rye and with separate grains, she clung faster to his arm
and pressed it closer to her. He had quite forgotten the momentary
unpleasant impression, and alone with her he felt, now that the
thought of her approaching motherhood was never for a moment absent
from his mind, a new and delicious bliss, quite pure from all alloy of
sense, in being near to the woman he loved. There was no need of
speech, yet he longed to hear the sound of her voice, which, like
her eyes, had changed since she had become pregnant. In her voice,
as in her eyes, there was that softness and gravity which is found
in people continually concentrated on some cherished pursuit.
  "So you're not tired? Lean more on me," said he.
  "No, I'm so glad of a chance of being alone with you, and I must
own, though I'm happy with them, I sigh for our winter evenings
alone."
  "That was good, but this is even better. Both are better," he
said, squeezing her hand.
  "Do you know what we were talking about when you came in?"
  "About jam?"
  "Oh, yes, about jam too; but, afterward, about how men propose."
  "Ah!" said Levin, listening more to the sound of her voice than to
her words, and all the while paying attention to the road, which
passed now through the forest, and avoiding places where she might
make a false step.
  "And about Sergei Ivanovich and Varenka. You've noticed?... I'm very
anxious for it," she went on. "What do you think about it?" And she
peeped into his face.
  "I don't know what to think," Levin answered, smiling. "Sergei seems
very strange to me in that way. I told you, you know..."
  "Yes, that he was in love with that girl who died...."
  "That was when I was a child; I know about it from hearsay and
tradition. I remember him then. He was wonderfully sweet. But I've
watched him since with women; he is friendly, some of them he likes,
but one feels that to him they're simply people, not women."
  "Yes, but now with Varenka... I fancy there's something..."
  "Perhaps there is.... But one has to know him.... He's a peculiar,
wonderful person. He lives a spiritual life only. He's too pure, too
exalted a nature."
  "Why? Would this lower him, then?"
  "No, but he's so used to a spiritual life that he can't reconcile
himself with actual fact, and Varenka is after all fact."
  Levin had grown used by now to uttering his thought boldly,
without taking the trouble of clothing it in exact language. He knew
that his wife, in such moments of loving tenderness as now, would
understand what he meant to say from a hint, and she did understand
him.
  "Yes, but there's not so much of that actual fact about her as about
me. I can see that he would never have cared for me. She is altogether
spiritual."
  "Oh, no, he is so fond of you, and I am always so glad when my
people like you...."
  "Yes, he's very good to me; but..."
  "It's not as it was with poor Nikolenka.... You really cared for
each other," Levin finished. "Why not speak of him?" he added. "I
sometimes blame myself for not doing so; it ends in one's
forgetting. Ah, how terrible and dear he was!... Yes, what were we
talking about?" Levin said, after a pause.
  "You think he can't fall in love," said Kitty, translating into
her own language.
  "It's not so much that he can't fall in love," Levin said,
smiling, "but he has not the weakness necessary.... I've always envied
him, and even now, when I'm so happy, I still envy him."
  "You envy him for not being able to fall in love?"
  "I envy him for being better than me," said Levin. "He does not live
for himself. His whole life is subordinated to his duty. And that's
why he can be calm and contented."
  "And you?" Kitty asked, with an ironical and loving smile.
  She could never have explained the chain of thought that made her
smile; but the last link in it was that her husband, in exalting his
brother and abasing himself, was not quite sincere. Kitty knew that
this insincerity came from his love for his brother, from his sense of
shame at being too happy, and, above all, from his unflagging
craving to be better- she loved this trait in him, and so she smiled.
  "And you? What are you dissatisfied with?" she asked, with the
same smile.
  Her disbelief in his self-dissatisfaction delighted him, and
unconsciously he tried to draw her into giving utterance to the
grounds of her disbelief.
  "I am happy, but dissatisfied with myself..." he said.
  "Why, how can you be dissatisfied with yourself if you are happy?"
  "Well, how shall I say?... In my heart I really care for nothing
whatever but that you should not stumble- see? Oh, but really you
mustn't skip about like that!" he cried, breaking off to scold her for
too agile a movement in stepping over a branch that lay in the path.
"But when I think about myself, and compare myself with others,
especially with my brother, I feel I'm a poor creature."
  "But in what way?" Kitty pursued with the same smile. "Don't you,
too, work for others? What about your farmsteading, and your
agriculture, and your book?..."
  "Oh, but I feel, and particularly just now- it's your fault," he
said, pressing her hand- "that all that doesn't count. I do it, in a
way, halfheartedly. If I could care for all that as I care for you!...
Instead of that, I do it in these days like a task that is set me."
  "Well, what would you say about papa?" asked Kitty. "Is he a poor
creature then, as he does nothing for the public good?"
  "He? No! But then, one must have the simplicity, the
straight-forwardness, the goodness of your father: and I haven't got
that. I do nothing, and I fret about it. It's all your doing. Before
you- and this too," he added with a glance toward her waist that she
understood- "I put all my energies into work; now I can't, and I'm
ashamed; I do it just as though it were a task set me; I'm
pretending...."
  "Well, but would you like to change this minute with Sergei
Ivanovich?" said Kitty. "Would you like to do this work for the
general good, and to love the task set you, as he does, and nothing
else?"
  "Of course not," said Levin. "But I'm so happy that I don't
understand anything. So you think he'll propose to her today?" he
added after a brief silence.
  "I think so, and I don't think so. Only, I'm awfully anxious for it.
Here, wait a minute." She stooped down and picked a wild daisy at
the edge of the path. "Come, count: he will, he won't," she said,
giving him the flower.
  "He will, he won't," said Levin, tearing off the white petals.
  "No, no!" Kitty, snatching at his hand, stopped him. She had been
watching his fingers with agitation. "You picked off two."
  "Oh, but see, this little one shan't count to make up," said
Levin, tearing off a little half-grown petal. "Here's the droshky
overtaking us."
  "Aren't you tired, Kitty?" called the Princess.
  "Not in the least."
  "If you are you can get in, as the horses are quiet and walking."
  But it was not worth-while to get in; they were quite near the
place, and all walked on together.
                             IV.

  Varenka, with her white kerchief on her black hair, surrounded by
the children, gaily and good-humoredly looking after them, and at
the same time visibly excited at the possibility of receiving a
declaration from the man she cared for, was very attractive. Sergei
Ivanovich walked beside her, and never left off admiring her.
Looking at her, he recalled all the delightful things he had heard
from her lips, all the good he knew about her, and became more and
more conscious that the feeling he had for her was something special
that he had felt long, long ago, and only once, in his early youth.
The feeling of happiness in being near her continually grew, and at
last reached such a point that, as he put a huge, slender-stalked
mushroom with rolled brims, in her basket, he looked straight into her
face, and noticing the flush of glad and alarmed excitement that
overspread her face, he was confused himself, and smiled to her in
silence a smile that said too much.
  "If so," he said to himself, "I ought to think it over and make up
my mind, and not give way like a boy to the impulse of a moment."
  "I'm going to pick by myself apart from all the rest, or else my
efforts will make no show," he said, and he left the edge of the
forest where they were walking on low silky grass between old birch
trees standing far apart, and went more into the heart of the wood,
where between the white birch trunks there were gray trunks of aspen
and dark bushes of hazel. Walking some forty paces away, Sergei
Ivanovich, knowing he was out of sight, stood still behind a bushy
spindle tree in full flower with its rosy-red catkins. It was
perfectly still all round him. Only overhead, in the birches under
which he stood, the flies, like a swarm of bees, buzzed unceasingly,
and from time to time the children's voices floated across to him. All
at once he heard, not far from the edge of the wood, the sound of
Varenka's contralto voice, calling Grisha, and a smile of delight
passed over Sergei Ivanovich's face. Conscious of this smile, he shook
his head disapprovingly at his own state and, taking out a cigar, he
began lighting it. For a long while he could not get a match to
light against the trunk of a birch tree. The soft pellicle of the
white bark stuck around the phosphorus, and the light went out. At
last one of the matches burned, and the fragrant cigar smoke, hovering
uncertainly in flat, wide coils, stretched away forward and upward
over a bush under the overhanging branches of a birch tree. Watching
the streak of smoke, Sergei Ivanovich walked gently on, deliberating
on his position.
  "Why not?" he thought. "If it were only a flash in the pan, or a
passion, if it were only this attraction- this mutual attraction (I
can call it a mutual attraction), yet if I felt that it was in
contradiction with the whole bent of my life; if I felt that in giving
way to this attraction I should be false to my vocation and my duty...
But it's not so. The only thing I can say against it is that, when I
lost Marie, I said to myself that I would remain faithful to her
memory. That's the only thing I can say against my feeling....
That's a great thing," Sergei Ivanovich said to himself, feeling at
the same time that this consideration had not the slightest importance
for him personally, but would only perhaps detract from his romantic
character in the eyes of others. "But apart from that, however much
I searched, I should never find anything to say against my feeling. If
I were choosing by considerations of intellect alone, I could not have
found anything better."
  However many women and girls he thought of whom he knew, he could
not think of a girl who united to such a degree all- positively all-
the qualities he would wish to see in his wife. She had all the
charm and freshness of youth, but she was not a child; and if she
loved him, she loved him consciously, as a woman ought to love; that
was one thing. Another point: she was not only far from being worldly,
but had an unmistakable distaste for worldly society, and at the
same time she knew the world, and had all the ways of a woman of the
best society, which were absolutely essential to Sergei Ivanovich's
conception of the woman who was to share his life. Thirdly: she was
religious, and not like a child, unconsciously religious and good,
as Kitty, for example, was, but her life was founded on religious
principles. Even in trifling matters, Sergei Ivanovich found in her
all that he wanted in his wife: she was poor and alone in the world,
so she would not bring with her a mass of relations and their
influence into her husband's house, as he saw now in Kitty's case. She
would owe everything to her husband, which was what he had always
desired, too, for his future family life. And this girl, who united
all these qualities, loved him. He was a modest man, but he could
not help seeing it. And he loved her. There was one consideration
against it- his age. But he came of a long-lived family, he had not
a single gray hair, no one would have taken him for forty, and he
remembered Varenka's saying that it was only in Russia that men of
fifty thought themselves old, and that in France a man of fifty
considers himself dans la force de l'age, while a man of forty is un
jeune homme. But what did the mere reckoning of years matter when he
felt as young in heart as he had been twenty years ago? Was it not
youth to feel as he felt now, when coming from the other side to the
edge of the wood he saw in the glowing light of the slanting
sunbeams the graceful figure of Varenka in her yellow gown with her
basket, walking lightly by the trunk of an old birch tree, and when
this impression of the sight of Varenka blended so harmoniously with
the beauty of the view, of the yellow oat field lying bathed in the
slanting sunshine, and, beyond it, the distant ancient forest, flecked
with yellow and melting into the blue of the distance? His heart
throbbed joyously. A softened feeling came over him. He felt that he
had made up his mind. Varenka, who had just crouched down to pick a
mushroom, rose with a supple movement and looked round. Flinging
away the cigar, Sergei Ivanovich advanced with resolute steps toward
her.
                             V.

  "Varvara Andreevna, when I was very young, I set before myself the
ideal of the woman I loved and should be happy to call my wife. I have
lived through a long life, and now for the first time I have met
what I sought- in you. I love you, and offer you my hand."
  Sergei Ivanovich was saying this to himself while he was ten paces
from Varenka. Kneeling down, with her hands over the mushrooms to
guard them from Grisha, she was calling little Masha.
  "Come here, little ones! There are so many!" she was saying in her
sweet, deep voice.
  Seeing Sergei Ivanovich approaching, she did not get up and did
not change her position, but everything told him that she felt his
presence and was glad of it.
  "Well, did you find some?" she asked from under the white
kerchief, turning her handsome, gently smiling face to him.
  "Not one," said Sergei Ivanovich. "Did you?"
  She did not answer, busy with the children who thronged about her.
  "That one too, near the twig," she pointed out to little Masha a
little fungus, split in half across its rosy cap by the dry grass from
under which it thrust itself. Varenka got up while Masha picked the
fungus, breaking it into two white halves. "This brings back my
childhood," she added, moving apart from the children, to Sergei
Ivanovich's side.
  They walked on for a few steps in silence. Varenka saw that he
wanted to speak; she guessed of what, and felt faint with joy and
panic. They had walked so far away that no one could hear them now,
but still he did not begin. It would have been better for Varenka to
be silent. After a silence it would have been easier for them to say
what they wanted to say, than after talking about mushrooms. But
against her own will, as it were accidentally, Varenka said:
  "So you found nothing? In the middle of the wood there are always
fewer, though."
  Sergei Ivanovich sighed and made no answer. He was annoyed that
she had spoken about the mushrooms. He wanted to bring her back to the
first words she had uttered about her childhood; but after a pause
of some length, as though against his own will, he made an observation
in response to her last words.
  "I have heard that the white edible fungi are found principally at
the edge of the wood, though I can't tell them apart."
  Some minutes more passed; they moved still farther away from the
children, and were quite alone. Varenka's heart throbbed so that she
heard it beating, and felt that she was turning red, and pale, and red
again.
  To be the wife of a man like Koznishev, after her position with
Madame Stahl, was to her imagination the height of happiness. Besides,
she was almost certain that she was in love with him. And this
moment it would have to be decided. She felt frightened. She dreaded
both his speaking and his not speaking.
  Now or never it must be said- Sergei Ivanovich felt that too.
Everything in the expression, the flushed cheeks and the downcast eyes
of Varenka betrayed a painful suspense. Sergei Ivanovich saw it, and
felt sorry for her. He felt even that to say nothing now would be a
slight to her. Rapidly in his own mind he ran over all the arguments
in support of his decision. He even said over to himself the words
in which he meant to put his proposal, but instead of those words,
some utterly unexpected reflection that occurred to him made him ask:
  "What is the difference between the 'birch' mushroom and the 'white'
mushroom?"
  Varenka's lips quivered with emotion as she answered:
  "In the top part there is scarcely any difference- it's in the
stalk."
  And as soon as these words were uttered, both he and she felt that
it was over, that what was to have been said would not be said; and
their emotion, which up to then had been continually growing more
intense, began to subside.
  "The birch mushroom's stalk suggests a dark man's chin after two
days without shaving," said Sergei Ivanovich, speaking quite calmly
now.
  "Yes, that's true," answered Varenka smiling, and unconsciously
the direction of their walk changed. They began to turn toward the
children. Varenka felt both hurt and ashamed; at the same time she
felt a sense of relief.
  When he had got home again, and went over the whole set of
arguments, Sergei Ivanovich thought his previous decision had been a
mistaken one. He could not be false to the memory of Marie.
  "Gently, children, gently!" Levin shouted quite angrily to the
children, standing before his wife to protect her when the crowd of
children flew with shrieks of delight to meet them.
  Behind the children Sergei Ivanovich and Varenka walked out of the
forest. Kitty had no need to ask Varenka; she saw from the calm and
somewhat crestfallen faces of both that her plans had not come off.
  "Well?" her husband questioned her as they were going home again.
  "No bites," said Kitty, her smile and manner of speaking recalling
her father, a likeness Levin often noticed with pleasure.
  "No bites, how?"
  "I'll show you," she said, taking her husband's hand, lifting it
to her mouth, and just faintly brushing it with closed lips. "Like a
kiss on a priest's hand."
  "Which one didn't bite?" he said, laughing.
  "Both. But it should have been like this..."
  "There are some peasants coming..."
  "Oh, they didn't see."
                             VI.

  During the time of the children's tea the grownups sat on the
balcony and talked as though nothing had happened though they all,
especially Sergei Ivanovich and Varenka, were very well aware that
there had happened an event which, though negative, was of very
great importance. They both had the same feeling, rather like that
of a schoolboy after an unlucky examination, which has left him in the
same class or shut him out of school forever. Everyone present, also
feeling that something had happened, talked eagerly about extraneous
subjects. Levin and Kitty were particularly happy and conscious of
their love that evening. And their happiness in their love seemed to
imply a disagreeable reference to those who would have liked to feel
the same and could not- and they felt a prick of conscience.
  "Mark my words, Alexandre will not come," said the old Princess.
  That evening they were expecting Stepan Arkadyevich to come down
by train, and the old Prince had written that possibly he might come
too.
  "And I know why," the Princess went on; "he says that newly
married couples ought to be left alone for a while at first."
  "But papa has left us alone. We've never seen him," said Kitty.
"Besides, we're not newly married!- we're old married people by now.
  "Only if he doesn't come, I shall say good-by to you, children,"
said the Princess, sighing mournfully.
  "What nonsense, mamma!" both the daughters fell upon her at once.
"How do you suppose he is feeling? Why, now..."
  And suddenly there was an unexpected quiver in the Princess's voice.
Her daughters were silent, and looked at one another. "Maman always
finds something to be miserable about," they said in that glance. They
did not know that happy as the Princess was in her daughter's house,
and useful as she felt herself to be there, she had been extremely
miserable, both on her own account and her husband's, ever since
they had married off their last and favorite daughter, and their
family nest had been left empty.
  "What is it, Agathya Mikhailovna?" Kitty asked suddenly of Agathya
Mikhailovna, who was standing with a mysterious air, and a face full
of meaning.
  "About supper."
  "Well, that's right," said Dolly; "you go and arrange about it,
and I'll go and hear Grisha repeat his lesson, or else he will have
done nothing all day."
  "That's my duty! No, Dolly, I'm going," said Levin, jumping up.
  Grisha, who was by now at a high school, had to go over the
lessons of the term in the summer holidays. Darya Alexandrovna, who
had been studying Latin with her son in Moscow before, had made it a
rule on coming to the Levins' to go over with him, at least once a
day, the most difficult lessons of Latin and arithmetic. Levin had
offered to take her place, but the mother, having once overheard
Levin's lesson, and noticing that it was not given exactly as the
teacher in Moscow had given it, said resolutely, though with much
embarrassment and anxiety not to mortify Levin, that they must keep
strictly to the book as the teacher had done, and that she had
better undertake it again herself. Levin was amazed both at Stepan
Arkadyevich, who, by neglecting his duty, threw upon the mother the
supervision of studies of which she had no comprehension, and at the
teachers for teaching the children so badly. But he promised his
sister-in-law to give the lessons exactly as she wished. And he went
on teaching Grisha, not in his own way, but by the book, and so took
little interest in it, and often forgot the hour of the lesson. So
it had been today.
  "No, I'm going, Dolly, you sit still," he said. "We'll do it all
properly, according to the book. Only when Stiva comes, and we go
out shooting, then we shall have to miss it."
  And Levin went to Grisha.
  Varenka was saying the same thing to Kitty. Even in the happy,
well-ordered household of the Levins, Varenka had succeeded in
making herself useful.
  "I'll see to the supper, you sit still," she said, and got up to
go to Agathya Mikhailovna.
  "Yes, yes, most likely they've not been able to get chickens. If so,
our..."
  "Agathya Mikhailovna and I will see about it," and Varenka
vanished with her.
  "What a fine girl!" said the Princess.
  "Not merely fine, maman; she's an exquisite girl; there's no one
else like her."
  "So you are expecting Stepan Arkadyevich today?" said Sergei
Ivanovich, evidently not disposed to pursue the conversation about
Varenka. "It would be difficult to find two sons-in-law more unlike
than yours," he said with a subtle smile. "One mobility itself, only
living in society, like a fish in water; the other our Kostia, lively,
alert, quick in everything, but, as soon as he is in society, he
either sinks into apathy, or struggles helplessly like a fish on
land."
  "Yes, he's very heedless," said the Princess, addressing Sergei
Ivanovich. "I've intended, indeed, to ask you to tell him that it's
out of the question for her" (she indicated Kitty) "to stay here; that
she positively must come to Moscow. He talks of getting a doctor
down..."
  "Maman, he'll do everything; he has agreed to everything," Kitty
said, angry with her mother for appealing to Sergei Ivanovich to judge
in such a matter.
  In the middle of their conversation they heard the snorting of
horses and the sound of wheels on the gravel.
  Dolly had not time to get up to go and meet her husband, when from
the window of the room below, where Grisha was having his lesson,
Levin leaped out and helped Grisha out after him.
  "It's Stiva!" Levin shouted from under the balcony. "We've finished,
Dolly, don't be afraid!" he added, and started running like a boy to
meet the carriage.
  "Is, ea, id, ejus, ejus, ejus!" shouted Grisha, skipping along the
avenue.
  "And someone else too! Papa, of course!" cried Levin, stopping at
the entrance of the avenue. "Kitty, don't come down the steep
staircase- go around."
  But Levin had been mistaken in taking the person sitting in the
carriage for the old Prince. As he got nearer to the carriage he saw
beside Stepan Arkadyevich not the Prince, but a handsome, stout
young man in a Scotch cap, with long ends of ribbon behind. This was
Vassenka Veslovsky, a distant cousin of the Shcherbatskys, a brilliant
young gentleman in Peterburg and Moscow society- a capital fellow, and
a keen sportsman," as Stepan Arkadyevich said, introducing him.
  Not a whit abashed by the disappointment caused by his having come
in place of the old Prince, Veslovsky greeted Levin gaily, claiming
acquaintance with him in the past, and snatching up Grisha into the
carriage, lifted him over the pointer that Stepan Arkadyevich had
brought with him.
  Levin did not get into the carriage, but walked behind. He was
rather vexed at the nonarrival of the old Prince, whom he liked more
and more the more he saw him, and also the arrival of this Vassenka
Veslovsky, a quite alien and superfluous person. He seemed to him
still more alien and superfluous when, on approaching the steps
where the whole party, children and grownups, were gathered together
in much animation, Levin saw Vassenka Veslovsky, with a particularly
warm and gallant air, kissing Kitty's hand.
  "Your wife and I are cousins and very old friends," said Vassenka
Veslovsky, once more shaking Levin's hand with great warmth.
  "Well, are there plenty of birds?" Stepan Arkadyevich said to Levin,
hardly leaving time for everyone to exchange greetings. "We've come
with the most savage intentions. Why, maman, they've not been in
Moscow since! Look, Tania, here's something for you! Get it, please,
it's in the carriage, behind!" he talked in all directions. "How
pretty you've grown, Dollenka," he said to his wife, once more kissing
her hand, holding it in one of his, and patting it with the other.
  Levin, who a minute before had been in the happiest frame of mind,
now looked darkly at everyone, and everything displeased him.
  "Who was it he kissed yesterday with these lips?" he thought,
looking at Stepan Arkadyevich's tender demonstrations to his wife.
He looked at Dolly, and he did not like her either.
  "She doesn't believe in his love. So what is she pleased about?
Revolting!" thought Levin.
  He looked at the Princess, who had been so dear to him a minute
before, and he did not like the manner in which she welcomed this
Vassenka, with his ribbons, just as though she were in her own house.
  Even Sergei Ivanovich, who had come out too on the steps, seemed
to him unpleasant with the show of cordiality with which he met Stepan
Arkadyevich, though Levin knew that his brother neither liked nor
respected Oblonsky.
  And Varenka- even she seemed hateful, with her air sainte nitouche
making the acquaintance of this gentleman, while all the while she was
thinking of nothing but getting married.
  And more hateful than anyone was Kitty, for falling in with the tone
of gaiety with which this gentleman regarded his visit in the country,
as though it were a holiday for himself and everyone else. And, more
unpleasant than everything else, was that peculiar smile with which
she responded to his smile.
  Noisily talking, they all went into the house; but as soon as they
were all seated, Levin turned and went out.
  Kitty saw something was wrong with her husband. She tried to seize a
moment to speak to him alone, but he made haste to get away from
her, saying he was wanted at the countinghouse. It was long since
his own work on the estate had seemed to him so important as at that
moment. "It's all holiday for them," he thought; "but these are no
holiday matters, they won't wait, and there's no living without them."
                             VII.

  Levin came back to the house only when they sent to summon to
supper. On the stairs were standing Kitty and Agathya Mikhailovna,
consulting about wines for supper.
  "But why are you making all this fuss? Have what we usually do."
  "No, Stiva doesn't drink... Kostia, stop, what's the matter?"
Kitty began, hurrying after him, but he strode ruthlessly away to
the dining room without waiting for her, and at once joined in the
lively general conversation which was being maintained there by
Vassenka Veslovsky and Stepan Arkadyevich.
  "Well, what do you say, are we going shooting tomorrow?" said Stepan
Arkadyevich.
  "Please, do let's go," said Veslovsky, moving to another chair,
where he sat down sideways, with one fat leg crossed under him.
  "I shall be delighted, we will go. And have you had any shooting yet
this year?" said Levin to Veslovsky, looking intently at his leg,
but speaking with that forced amiability that Kitty knew so well in
him, and that was so out of keeping with him. "I can't answer for
our finding double snipe, but there are plenty of jacksnipe. Only we
ought to start early. You're not tired? Aren't you tired, Stiva?"
  "Me tired? I've never been tired yet. Suppose we stay up all
night. Let's go for a walk!"
  "Yes, really, let's not go to bed at all! Capital!" Veslovsky chimed
in.
  "Oh, we all know you can do without sleep, and keep other people
up too," Dolly said to her husband, with that faint note of irony in
her voice which she almost always had now with her husband. "But to my
thinking, it's time for bed now... I'm going, I don't want supper."
  "No, do stay a little, Dollenka," said Stepan Arkadyevich, going
round to her side behind the table where they were having supper.
"I've so much still to tell you."
  "Nothing really, I suppose."
  "Do you know Veslovsky has been at Anna's, and he's going to them
again? You know they're hardly seventy verstas from you, and I too
must certainly go over there. Veslovsky, come here!"
  Vassenka crossed over to the ladies, and sat down beside Kitty.
  "Ah, do tell me, please; you have visited her? How was she?" Darya
Alexandrovna appealed to him.
  Levin was left at the other end of the table, and though never
pausing in his conversation with the Princess and Varenka, he saw that
there was an eager and mysterious conversation going on between Stepan
Arkadyevich, Dolly, Kitty, and Veslovsky. And that was not all. He saw
on his wife's face an expression of real feeling as she gazed with
fixed eyes on the handsome face of Vassenka, who was telling them
something with great animation.
  "It's exceedingly nice at their place," Veslovsky was telling them
about Vronsky and Anna. "I can't, of course, take it upon myself to
judge, but in their house you feel the real feeling of home."
  "What do they intend doing?"
  "I believe they think of going to Moscow for the winter."
  "How jolly it would be for us all to go over to them together!
When are you going there?" Stepan Arkadyevich asked Vassenka.
  "I'm spending July there."
  "Will you go?" Stepan Arkadyevich said to his wife.
  "I've been wanting to a long while; I shall certainly go," said
Dolly. "I am sorry for her, and I know her. She's a splendid woman.
I will go alone, when you go back, and then I shall be in no one's
way. And it will be better indeed without you."
  "To be sure," said Stepan Arkadyevich. "And you, Kitty?"
  "I? Why should I go?" Kitty said, flushing all over, and she glanced
round at her husband.
  "Do you know Anna Arkadyevna, then?" Veslovsky asked her. "She's a
very fascinating woman?"
  "Yes," she answered Veslovsky, crimsoning still more. She got up and
walked across to her husband.
  "Are you going shooting, then, tomorrow?" she said.
  His jealousy had in these few moments, especially at the flush
that had overspread her cheeks while she was talking to Veslovsky,
gone far indeed. Now as he heard her words, he construed them in his
own fashion. Strange as it was to him afterward to recall it, it
seemed to him at the moment clear that in asking whether he was
going shooting, all she cared to know was whether he would give that
pleasure to Vassenka Veslovsky, with whom, as he fancied, she was in
love.
  "Yes, I'm going," he answered her in an unnatural voice,
disagreeable to himself.
  "No, better spend the day here tomorrow, or Dolly won't see anything
of her husband, and set off the day after," said Kitty.
  The motive of Kitty's words was interpreted by Levin thus: "Don't
separate me from him. I don't care about your going, but do let me
enjoy the society of this delightful young man."
  "Oh, if you wish, we'll stay here tomorrow," Levin answered, with
peculiar amiability.
  Vassenka meanwhile, utterly unsuspecting the misery his presence had
occasioned, got up from the table after Kitty, and watching her with
smiling and admiring eyes, he followed her.
  Levin saw that look. He turned white, and for a minute he could
hardly breathe. "How dare he look at my wife like that!" was the
feeling that boiled within him.
  "Tomorrow, then? Do, please, let us go," said Vassenka, sitting down
on a chair, and again crossing his leg as his habit was.
  Levin's jealousy went further still. Already he saw himself a
deceived husband, looked upon by his wife and her lover as simply
necessary to provide them with the conveniences and pleasures of
life.... But in spite of that he made polite and hospitable
inquiries of Vassenka about his shooting, his gun, and his boots,
and agreed to go shooting next day.
  Happily for Levin, the old Princess cut short his agonies by getting
up herself and advising Kitty to go to bed. But even at this point
Levin could not escape another agony. As he said good night to his
hostess, Vassenka would again have kissed her hand, but Kitty,
reddening, drew back her hand and said with a naive bluntness, for
which the old Princess scolded her afterward:
  "We don't like that fashion."
  In Levin's eyes she was to blame for having allowed such relations
to arise, and still more to blame for showing so awkwardly that she
did not like them.
  "Why, how can one want to go to bed!" said Stepan Arkadyevich,
who, after drinking several glasses of wine at supper, was now in
his most charming and lyrical humor. "Look, Kitty," he said,
pointing to the moon, which had just risen behind the linden trees,
"how exquisite! Veslovsky, this is the time for a serenade. You
know, he has a splendid voice; we practised songs together along the
road. He has brought some lovely songs with him- two new ones. Varvara
Andreevna and he must sing some duets."

  When the party had broken up, Stepan Arkadyevich walked a long while
about the avenue with Veslovsky; their voices could be heard singing
one of the new songs.
  Levin, hearing these voices, sat scowling in an easy chair in his
wife's bedroom, and maintained an obstinate silence when she asked him
what was wrong. But when at last with a timid glance she hazarded
the question: "Was there perhaps something you disliked about
Veslovsky?"- it all burst out, and he told her all. He was hurt
himself by what he was saying, and that exasperated him all the more.
  He stood facing her with his eyes glittering menacingly under his
scowling brows, and he squeezed his strong arms across his chest, as
though he were straining every nerve to hold himself in. The
expression of his face would have been grim, and even cruel, if it had
not at the same time had a look of suffering which touched her. His
jaws were twitching, and his voice kept breaking.
  "You must understand that I'm not jealous, that's a nasty word. I
can't be jealous, and believe that... I can't say what I feel, but
this is awful... I'm not jealous, but I'm wounded, humiliated that
anybody dare think, that anybody dare look at you with eyes like
that...."
  "Eyes like what?" said Kitty, trying as conscientiously as
possible to recall every word and gesture of that evening and every
shade implied in them.
  At the very bottom of her heart she did think there had been
something, precisely at the moment when he had crossed over after
her to the other end of the table; but she dared not own it even to
herself, and would have been even more unable to bring herself to
say so to him, and so increase his suffering.
  "And what can there possibly be attractive about me as I am now?..."
  "Ah!" he cried, clutching at his head, "You shouldn't say that!...
If you had been attractive, then..."
  "Oh, no, Kostia, oh, wait a minute, oh, do listen!" she said,
looking at him with an expression of pained commiseration. "Why,
what can you be thinking about! When for me there's no one in the
world, no one, no one!... Would you like me never to see anyone?
  For the first minute she had been offended at his jealousy; she
was angry that the slightest amusement, even the most innocent, should
be forbidden her; but now she would readily have sacrificed, not
merely such trifles, but everything, for his peace of mind, to save
him from the agony he was suffering.
  "You must understand the horror and comedy of my position," he
went on in a desperate whisper; "that he's in my house, that he's done
nothing positively improper- one can take exception only to his free
and easy airs and the way he tucks his legs in under him. He thinks
it's the best possible form, and so I'm obliged to be civil to him."
  "But, Kostia, you're exaggerating," said Kitty, at the bottom of her
heart rejoicing at the depth of his love for her, shown now in his
jealousy.
  "The most awful part of it all is that you're just as you always
are, and especially now when to me you're something sacred, and
we're so happy, so particularly happy- and all of a sudden a little
wretch... He's not a little wretch; why should I abuse him? I have
nothing to do with him. But why should my, and your, happiness..."
  "Do you know, I understand now what it all came from," Kitty was
beginning.
  "Well, what? What?"
  "I saw how you looked while we were talking at supper."
  "Well, well!" Levin said in dismay.
  She told him what they had been talking about. And as she told
him, she was breathless with emotion. Levin was silent for a space,
then he scanned her pale and distressed face, and suddenly he clutched
at his head.
  "Katia, I've been worrying you! Darling, forgive me! It's madness!
Katia, I'm a criminal. And how could you be so distressed at such
idiocy?"
  "Oh, I was sorry for you."
  "For me? For me? How mad I am!... But why make you miserable? It's
awful to think that any outsider can shatter our happiness."
  "It's humiliating too, of course."
  "Oh, then I'll keep him here all the summer, and will overwhelm
him with civility," said Levin, kissing her hands. "You shall see.
Tomorrow... oh, yes, we are going tomorrow."
                             VIII.

  Next day, before the ladies were up, the carriages for the
shooting party, the droshky and a trap, were at the door, and Laska,
aware since early morning that they were going shooting, after much
whining and darting to and fro, had sat herself down in the droshky
beside the coachman, and, disapproving of the delay, was excitedly
watching the door from which the sportsmen still did not issue. The
first to come out was Vassenka Veslovsky, in new high boots that
reached halfway up his thick thighs, in a green blouse, with a new
cartridge belt, redolent of leather, and in his Scotch cap with
ribbons, with a brand-new English gun without a sling. Laska flew up
to him, welcomed him, and, jumping up, asked him in her own way
whether the others were coming soon; but getting no answer from him,
she returned to her post of observation and sank into repose again,
her head on one side, and one ear pricked up to listen. At last the
door opened with a creak, and Stepan Arkadyevich's spot-and-tan
pointer Krak flew out, running round and round and turning over in the
air. Stepan Arkadyevich himself followed with a gun in his hand and
a cigar in his mouth. "Soho, soho, Krak!" he cried encouragingly to
the dog, who put his paws up on his chest, catching at his gamebag.
Stepan Arkadyevich was dressed in brogues and puttees, in torn
trousers and a short coat. On his head there was a wreck of a hat of
indefinite form, but his gun of a new patent was a perfect gem, and
his gamebag and cartridge belt, though worn, were of the very best
quality.
  Vassenka Veslovsky had had no notion before that it was truly chic
for a sportsman to be in tatters, but to have his shooting outfit of
the best quality. He saw it now as he looked at Stepan Arkadyevich,
radiant in his rags, graceful, well-fed, and joyous, a typical Russian
nobleman. And he made up his mind that next time he went shooting he
would certainly adopt the same getup.
  "Well, and what about our host?" he asked.
  "A young wife," said Stepan Arkadyevich, smiling.
  "Yes, and such a charming one!"
  "He came down dressed. No doubt he's run up to her again."
  Stepan Arkadyevich guessed right. Levin had run up again to his wife
to ask her once more if she forgave him for his idiocy yesterday, and,
moreover, to beg her in Christ's name to be more careful. The great
thing was for her to keep away from the children- they might any
minute jostle against her. Then he had once more to hear her declare
that she was not angry with him for going away for two days, and to
beg her to be sure to send a note next morning by a servant on
horseback, to write him, if it were but two words only, to let him
know that all was well with her.
  Kitty was distressed, as she always was, at parting for a couple
of days from her husband, but when she saw his eager figure, looking
big and strong in his shooting boots and his white blouse, and a
sort of sportsman elation and excitement incomprehensible to her,
she forgot her own chagrin for the sake of his pleasure, and said
good-by to him cheerfully.
  "Pardon, gentlemen!" he said, running out on the steps. "Have you
put the lunch in? Why is the chestnut on the right? Well, it doesn't
matter. Laska, down; go and lie down!"
  "Put them with the herd of heifers," he said to the herdsman who was
waiting for him at the steps to ask him what was to be done with the
geld oxen. "Excuse me, here comes another villain."
  Levin jumped out of the droshky, in which he had already taken his
seat, to meet the carpenter, who came toward the steps with a rule
in his hand.
  "You didn't come to the countinghouse yesterday, and now you're
detaining me. Well, what is it?"
  "Would your honor let me make another turning? There's only three
steps to add. And we make it just fit at the same time. It will be
much more convenient."
  "You should have listened to me," Levin answered with annoyance.
"I said: Put the lines and then fit in the steps. Now there's no
setting it right. Do as I told you, and make a new staircase."
  The point was that in the wing that was being built the carpenter
had spoiled the staircase, fitting it together without calculating the
space it was to fill, so that the steps were all sloping when it was
put in place. Now the carpenter wanted to keep the same staircase,
by adding three steps.
  "It will be much better."
  "But where's your staircase coming out with its three steps?"
  "Why, upon my word, sir," the carpenter said with a contemptuous
smile. "It comes out right at the very spot. It starts here," he said,
with a persuasive gesture, "then it'll go up, and go up and come out."
  "But three steps will add to the length too... where is it to come
out?"
  "Why, to be sure, it'll go up, and come out," the carpenter said
obstinately and convincingly.
  "It'll reach the ceiling and the wall."
  "Upon my word! Why, it'll go up, and go up, and come out like this."
  Levin took out a ramrod and began sketching him the staircase in the
dust.
  "There, do you see?"
  "As your honor likes," said the carpenter, with a sudden gleam in
his eyes, obviously understanding the thing at last. "It seems it'll
be best to make a new one."
  "Well, then, do it as you're told," Levin shouted, seating himself
in the droshky. "Down! Hold the dogs, Philip!"
  Levin felt now at leaving behind all his family and household
cares such an eager sense of joy in life and expectation that he was
not disposed to talk. Besides that, he had that feeling of
concentrated excitement that every sportsman experiences as he
approaches the scene of action. If he had anything on his mind at that
moment, it was only the doubt whether they would start anything in the
Kolpensky marsh, whether Laska would show to advantage in comparison
with Krak, and whether he would shoot well that day himself. Not to
disgrace himself before a new spectator- not to be outdone by
Oblonsky- that too was a thought that crossed his brain.
  Oblonsky was feeling the same, and he too was not talkative.
Vassenka Veslovsky alone kept up a ceaseless flow of cheerful chatter.
As he listened to him now, Levin felt ashamed to think how unfair he
had been to him the day before. Vassenka was really a fine fellow,
simple, goodhearted, and very good-humored. If Levin had met him
before he was married, he would have made friends with him. Levin
rather disliked his holiday attitude to life and a sort of free and
easy assumption of elegance. It was as though he assumed a high degree
of importance in himself that could not be disputed, because he had
long nails and a stylish cap, and everything else to correspond; but
this could be forgiven for the sake of his good nature and good
breeding. Levin liked him for his good education, for speaking
French and English with such an excellent accent, and for being a
man of his world.
  Vassenka was extremely delighted with the left outrigger, a horse of
the Don steppes. He kept praising him enthusiastically. "How fine it
must be galloping over the steppes on a steppe horse! Eh? Isn't it?"
he said. He had imagined riding on a steppe horse as something wild
and romantic, and it turned out nothing of the sort. But his
simplicity, particularly in conjunction with his good looks, his
amiable smile, and the grace of his movements, was very attractive.
Either because his nature was sympathetic to Levin, or because Levin
was trying to atone for his sins of the previous evening by seeing
nothing but what was good in him- at any rate, he liked his society.
  After they had driven three verstas from home, Veslovsky all at once
felt for a cigar and his pocketbook, and did not know whether he had
lost them or left them on the table. In the pocketbook there were
three hundred and seventy roubles, and so the matter could not be left
in uncertainty.
  "Do you know what, Levin, I'll gallop home on that outrigger. That
will be splendid. Eh?" he said, preparing to get out.
  "No, why should you?" answered Levin, calculating that Vassenka
could hardly weigh less than six poods. "I'll send the coachman."
  The coachman rode back on the outrigger, and Levin himself drove the
remaining pair.
                             IX.

  "Well, now, what's our plan of campaign? Tell us all about it," said
Stepan Arkadyevich.
  "Our plan is this. Now we're driving to Gvozdiov. In Gvozdiov
there's a double snipe marsh on this side, and beyond Gvozdiov come
some magnificent jacksnipe marshes, where there are double snipe
too. It's hot now, and we'll get there- it's twenty verstas- toward
evening, and have some evening shooting; we'll spend the night there
and go on tomorrow to the bigger moors."
  "And is there nothing on the way?"
  "Yes; but we'll save ourselves; besides, it's hot. There are two
good little places, but I doubt there being anything to shoot."
  Levin would himself have liked to go into these little places, but
they were near home; he could shoot them over any time, and they
were only little places- there would hardly be room for three to
shoot. And so, with some insincerity, he said that he doubted there
being anything to shoot. When they reached a little marsh Levin
would have driven by, but Stepan Arkadyevich, with the experienced eye
of a sportsman, at once detected a soggy spot visible from the road.
  "Shan't we try that?" he said, pointing to the little marsh.
  "Levin, do, please! How delightful!" Vassenka Veslovsky began
begging, and Levin could not but consent.
  Before they had time to stop, the dogs had flown one before the
other into the marsh.
  "Krak! Laska!..."
  The dogs came back.
  "There won't be room for three. I'll stay here," said Levin,
hoping they would find nothing but pewits, which had been startled
by the dogs, and, turning over in their flight, were plaintively
wailing over the marsh.
  "No! Come along, Levin, let's go together!" Veslovsky called.
  "Really, there's no room. Laska, back, Laska! You won't want another
dog, will you?"
  Levin remained with the droshky, and looked enviously at the
sportsmen. They walked across the marsh. Except one moor hen and
pewits, of which Vassenka killed one, there was nothing in the marsh.
  "Come, you see now that it was not that I grudged the marsh," said
Levin, "only it's wasting time."
  "Oh, no, it was jolly all the same. Did you see us?" said Vassenka
Veslovsky, clambering awkwardly into the droshky with his gun and
his pewit in his hands. "How splendidly I shot this bird! Didn't I?
Well, shall we soon be getting to the real place?"
  The horses started off suddenly, Levin knocked his head against
the stock of someone's gun, and there was the report of a shot. The
gun did actually go off first, but that was how it seemed to Levin. It
appeared that Vassenka Veslovsky making the cocks safe had pressed one
trigger, and had held back the other cock. The charge flew into the
ground without doing harm to anyone. Stepan Arkadyevich shook his head
and laughed reprovingly at Veslovsky. But Levin had not the heart to
reprove him. In the first place, any reproach would have seemed to
be called forth by the danger he had incurred and the bump that had
come up on Levin's forehead. And besides, Veslovsky was at first so
naively distressed, and then laughed so good-humoredly and
infectiously at their general dismay, that one could not but laugh
with him.
  When they reached the second marsh, which was fairly large, and
would inevitably take some time to shoot over, Levin tried to persuade
them to pass it by. But Veslovsky again talked him over. Again, as the
marsh was narrow, Levin, like a good host, remained with the
carriages.
  Krak made straight for hummocks; Vassenka Veslovsky was the first to
run after the dog. Before Stepan Arkadyevich had time to come up, a
double snipe flew out. Veslovsky missed it and it flew into an
unmown meadow. This double snipe was left for Veslovsky to follow
up. Krak found it again and pointed, and Veslovsky shot it and went
back to the carriages.
  "Now you go and I'll stay with the horses," he said.
  Levin had begun to feel the pangs of a sportsman's envy. He handed
the reins to Veslovsky and walked into the marsh.
  Laska, who had been plaintively whining and fretting against the
injustice of her treatment, flew straight ahead to an unfailing place,
covered with mossy hummocks, that Levin knew well, and that Krak had
not yet come upon.
  "Why don't you stop her?" shouted Stepan Arkadyevich.
  "She won't scare them," answered Levin, sympathizing with his
bitch's pleasure and hurrying after her.
  As she came nearer and nearer to the familiar hummocks there was
more and more earnestness in Laska's exploration. A little marsh
bird did not divert her attention for more than an instant. She made
one circuit round the hummocks, was beginning a second, and suddenly
quivered with excitement and stood stock-still.
  "Come, come, Stiva!" shouted Levin, feeling his heart beginning to
beat more violently; and all of a sudden, as though some sort of
shutter had been drawn back from his straining ears, all sounds,
confused but loud, began to beat on his hearing, losing all sense of
distance. He heard the steps of Stepan Arkadyevich, mistaking them for
the tramp of the horses in the distance; he heard the brittle sound of
the tussock which came off with its roots when he had trodden on a
hummock, and he took this sound for the flight of a double snipe. He
heard too, not far behind him, a splashing in the water, which he
could not explain to himself.
  Picking his steps, he moved up to the dog.
  "Fetch it!"
  Not a double but a jacksnipe flew up from beside the dog. Levin
had lifted his gun, but at the very instant when he was taking aim,
the sound of splashing grew louder, came closer, and was joined with
the sound of Veslovsky's voice, shouting something with strange
loudness. Levin saw he had his gun pointed behind the snipe, but still
he fired.
  When he had made sure he had missed, Levin looked round and saw
the horses and the droshky not on the road but in the marsh.
  Veslovsky, eager to see the shooting, had driven into the marsh, and
got the horses stuck in the mud.
  "Damn the fellow!" Levin said to himself, as he went back to the
carriage that had sunk in the mire. "What did you drive in for?" he
said to him dryly, and, calling the coachman he began pulling the
horses out.
  Levin was vexed both at being hindered from shooting and at his
horses getting stuck in the mud, and still more at the fact that
neither Stepan Arkadyevich nor Veslovsky helped him and the coachman
to unharness the horses and get them out, since neither of them had
the slightest notion of harnessing. Without answering a syllable to
Vassenka's protestations that it had been quite dry there, Levin
worked in silence with the coachman at extricating the horses. But
then, as he got warm at the work and saw how assiduously Veslovsky was
tugging at the droshky by one of the splashboards, so that he broke it
indeed, Levin blamed himself for having under the influence of
yesterday's feelings been too cold to Veslovsky, and tried to be
particularly genial so as to smooth over his chilliness. When
everything had been put right, and the vehicles had been brought
back to the road, Levin had the lunch served.
  "Bon appetit- bonne conscience! Ce poulet va tomber jusqu'au fond de
mes bottes," Vassenka, who had recovered his spirits, quoted the
French saying as he finished his second chicken. "Well, now our
troubles are over, now everything's going to go well. Only, to atone
for my sins, I'm bound to sit on the box. That's so? Eh? No, no!
I'll be your Automedon. You shall see how I'll get you along," he
answered, without letting go the rein, when Levin begged him to let
the coachman drive. "No, I must atone for my sins, and I'm very
comfortable on the box." And he drove.
  Levin was a little afraid he would exhaust the horses, especially
the left of them, the chestnut, whom he did not know how to hold in;
but unconsciously he fell under the influence of his gaiety and
listened to the songs he sang all the way on the box, or the
descriptions and representations he gave of driving in the English
fashion, four-in-hand; and it was in the very best of spirits that
after lunch they drove to the Gvozdiov marsh.
                             X.

  Vassenka drove the horses so fast that they reached the marsh too
early, while it was still hot.
  As they drew near this more important marsh, the chief aim of
their expedition, Levin could not help considering how he could get
rid of Vassenka and be free in his movements. Stepan Arkadyevich
evidently had the same desire, and on his face Levin saw the look of
anxiety always present in a true sportsman when beginning shooting,
together with a certain good-humored slyness peculiar to him.
  "How shall we go? It's a splendid marsh, I see, and there are
hawks," said Stepan Arkadyevich, pointing to two great birds
hovering over the sedge. "Where there are hawks, there is sure to be
game."
  "Now, gentlemen," said Levin, pulling up his boots and examining the
lock of his gun with a somewhat somber expression, "do you see that
sedge?" He pointed to an oasis of blackish green in the huge half-mown
wet meadow that stretched along the right bank of the river. "The
marsh begins here, straight in front of us, do you see- where it is
greener? From here it runs to the right where the horses are; there
are hummocks there, and double snipe, and all round that sedge as
far as that alder tree, and right up to the mill. Over there, do you
see, where the creek is? That's the best place. There I once shot
seventeen jacksnipe. We'll separate with the dogs and go in
different directions, and then meet over there at the mill."
  "Well, who'll go left, and who to the right?" asked Stepan
Arkadyevich. "It's wider to the right; you two go that way and I'll
take the left," he said with apparent carelessness.
  "Capital! We'll make the bigger bag! Yes, come along, come along!"
Vassenka exclaimed.
  Levin could do nothing but agree, and they divided.
  As soon as they entered the marsh, the two dogs began hunting
about together and made toward the rust-colored spot. Levin knew
Laska's method, wary and indefinite; he knew the place too, and
expected a whole covey of snipe.
  "Veslovsky, walk beside me- beside me!" he said in a faint voice
to his companion splashing in the water behind him. Levin could not
help feeling an interest in the direction his gun was pointed, after
that casual shot near the Kolpensky marsh.
  "Oh, I won't get in your way, don't trouble about me."
  But Levin could not help troubling, and recalled Kitty's words at
parting: "Mind you don't shoot one another." The dogs came nearer
and nearer, passed each other, each pursuing its own scent. The
expectation of snipe was so intense that to Levin the smacking sound
of his own heel, as he drew it up out of the rusty mire, seemed to
be the call of a snipe, and he clutched and pressed the butt of his
gun.
  Bang! bang! sounded almost in his ear. Vassenka had fired at a flock
of ducks which was hovering over the marsh and flying at that moment
toward the sportsmen, far out of range. Before Levin had time to
look round, there was the whir of one snipe, another, a third, and
some eight more rose one after another.
  Stepan Arkadyevich hit one at the very moment when it was
beginning its zigzag movements, and the snipe fell as a clod into
the quagmire. Oblonsky aimed deliberately at another, still flying low
toward the sedge, and together with the report of the shot, that snipe
too fell, and it could be seen fluttering out where the sedge had been
cut, its unhurt wing showing white beneath.
  Levin was not so lucky: he aimed at his first bird too low, and
missed; he aimed at it again, just as it was rising, but at that
instant another snipe flew up at his very feet, distracting him so
that he missed again.
  While they were reloading their guns, another snipe rose, and
Veslovsky, who had had time to reload again, sent two charges of small
shot into the water. Stepan Arkadyevich picked up his snipe, and
with sparkling eyes looked at Levin.
  "Well, now let us separate," said Stepan Arkadyevich, and limping on
his left foot, holding his gun in readiness and whistling to his
dog, he walked off in one direction. Levin and Veslovsky walked off in
the other.
  It always happened with Levin that when his first shots were a
failure he got heated and out of temper, and shot badly the whole day.
So was it that day. The snipe showed themselves in numbers. They
kept flying up from just under the dogs, from under the sportsmen's
legs, and Levin might have retrieved his ill luck. But the more he
shot, the more he felt disgraced in the eyes of Veslovsky, who kept
popping away merrily and indiscriminately, killing nothing, and not in
the slightest abashed by his ill success. Levin, in feverish haste,
could not restrain himself, got more and more out of temper, and ended
by shooting almost without a hope of hitting. Laska, indeed, seemed to
understand this. She began searching more listlessly, and gazed back
at the sportsmen with apparent perplexity or reproach in her eyes.
Shots followed shots in rapid succession. The smoke of the powder hung
about the sportsmen, while in the great roomy net of the gamebag there
were only three light, small snipe. And of these one had been killed
by Veslovsky alone, and one by both of them together. Meanwhile,
from the other side of the marsh, came the sound of Stepan
Arkadyevich's shots, not frequent, but, as Levin fancied, well
directed, for almost after each they heard "Krak, Krak, apporte!"
  This excited Levin still more. The snipe were floating continually
in the air over the sedge. Their whirring wings close to the earth,
and their harsh cries high in the air, could be heard on all sides;
the snipe that had risen first and flown up into the air, settled
again before the sportsmen. Instead of two hawks there were now dozens
of them hovering with shrill cries over the marsh.
  After walking through the larger half of the marsh, Levin and
Veslovsky reached the place where the peasants' mowing grass was
divided into long strips reaching to the sedge, marked off in one
place by the trampled grass, in another by a path mown through it.
Half of these strips had already been mown.
  Though there was not so much hope of finding birds in the uncut part
as the cut part, Levin had promised Stepan Arkadyevich to meet him,
and so he walked on with his companion through the cut and uncut
patches.
  "Hi, hunters!" shouted one of a group of peasants, sitting on an
unharnessed telega: "Come and have some lunch with us! Have a drop
of wine!"
  Levin looked round.
  "Come along, it's all right!" shouted a good-humored-looking bearded
peasant with a red face, showing his white teeth in a grin, and
holding up a greenish bottle that flashed in the sunlight.
  "Qu'est-ce qu'ils disent?" asked Veslovsky.
  "They invite you to have some vodka. Most likely they've been
dividing the meadow into lots. I should have some," said Levin, not
without some guile, hoping Veslovsky would be tempted by the vodka,
and would go off to them.
  "Why do they offer it?"
  "Oh, they're merrymaking. Really, you should join them. You would be
interested."
  "Allons, c'est curieux."
  "You go, you go, you'll find the way to the mill!" cried Levin,
and looking round he perceived with satisfaction that Veslovsky,
bent and stumbling with weariness, holding his gun out at arm's
length, was making his way out of the marsh toward the peasants.
  "You come too!" the peasant shouted to Levin. "Never fear! Taste our
pie!"
  Levin felt a strong inclination for a drink of vodka and a bite of
bread. He was exhausted, and felt it a great effort to drag his
staggering legs out of the mire, and for a minute he hesitated. But
Laska was pointing. And immediately all his weariness vanished, and he
walked lightly through the swamp toward the dog. A snipe flew up at
his feet; he fired and killed it. Laska still pointed.- "Fetch it!"
Another bird flew up close to the dog. Levin fired. But it was an
unlucky day for him; he missed it, and when he went to look for the
one he had shot, he could not find that either. He wandered all
about the sedge, but Laska did not believe he had shot it, and when he
sent her to find it, she pretended to hunt for it, but did not
really do so.
  And in the absence of Vassenka, on whom Levin threw the blame of his
failure, things went no better. There was plenty of snipe still, but
Levin made one miss after another.
  The slanting rays of the sun were still hot; his clothes, soaked
through with perspiration, stuck to his body; his left boot full of
water weighed heavily on his leg and squelched at every step; the
sweat ran in drops down his powder-grimed face, his mouth was full
of a bitter taste, his nose of the smell of powder and stagnant water,
his ears were ringing with the incessant whir of the snipe; he could
not touch the barrel of his gun, it was so hot; his heart beat with
short, rapid throbs; his hands shook with excitement, and his weary
legs stumbled and staggered over the hummocks and in the swamp, but
still he walked on and still he shot. At last, after a disgraceful
miss, he flung his gun and his hat on the ground.
  "No, I must control myself," he said to himself. Picking up his
gun and his hat, he called Laska, and went out of the swamp. When he
got onto dry ground he sat down on a hummock, pulled off his boot
and emptied it, then walked to the marsh, drank some rust-tasting
water, moistened the burning hot barrel of his gun, and washed his
face and hands. Feeling refreshed, he went back to the spot where a
snipe had settled, firmly resolved to keep cool.
  He tried to be calm, but it was the same again. His finger pressed
the trigger before he had taken a good aim at the bird. It got worse
and worse.
  He had only five birds in his gamebag when he walked out of the
marsh toward the alders, where he was to rejoin Stepan Arkadyevich.
  Before he caught sight of Stepan Arkadyevich he saw his dog. Krak,
black all over with the stinking mire of the marsh, darted out from
behind the twisted root of an alder, and, with the air of a conqueror,
sniffed Laska. Behind Krak there came into view in the shade of the
alder tree the shapely figure of Stepan Arkadyevich. He came to meet
him, red and perspiring, with unbuttoned neckband, still limping in
the same way.
  "Well? You have been popping away!" he said, smiling good-humoredly.
  "How have you got on?" queried Levin. But there was no need to
ask, for he had already seen the full gamebag.
  "Oh, pretty fair."
  He had fourteen birds.
  "A splendid marsh! I've no doubt Veslovsky got in your way. It's
awkward too, shooting with one dog," said Stepan Arkadyevich, to
soften his triumph.
                             XI.

  When Levin and Stepan Arkadyevich reached the peasant's hut where
Levin always used to stay, Veslovsky was already there. He was sitting
in the middle of the hut, clinging with both hands to the bench from
which he was being pulled by a soldier, the brother of the peasant's
wife, who was helping him off with his miry boots. Veslovsky was
laughing his infectious, good-humored laugh.
  "I've only just come. Ils ont ete charmants. Just fancy they gave me
drink, and fed me! Such bread- it was exquisite! Dilicieux! And the
vodka- I never tasted any better. And they would not take a penny
for anything. And they kept saying: 'Excuse our homely ways.'"
  "What should they take anything for? They were entertaining you,
to be sure. Do you suppose they keep vodka for sale?" said the
soldier, succeeding at last in pulling the soaked boot off, together
with the blackened stocking.
  In spite of the dirtiness of the hut, which was all muddied by their
boots and the filthy dogs licking themselves clean, and the smells
of the marsh and the powder that filled the room, and the absence of
knives and forks, the party drank their tea and ate their supper
with a relish only known to sportsmen. Washed and clean, they went
into a hay barn swept ready for them, where the coachmen had been
making up beds for the gentlemen.
  Though it was dusk, not one of them wanted to go to sleep.
  After wavering among reminiscences and anecdotes of guns, of dogs,
and of former shooting parties, the conversation rested on a topic
that interested all of them. After Vassenka had several times over
expressed his appreciation of this delightful sleeping place among the
fragrant hay, this delightful broken telega (he supposed it to be
broken because the shafts had been taken out), of the good nature of
the peasants who had treated him to vodka, of the dogs who lay at
the feet of their respective masters, Oblonsky began telling them of a
delightful shooting party at Malthus's where he had stayed the
previous summer. Malthus was a well-known capitalist, who had made his
money by speculation in railway shares. Stepan Arkadyevich described
what snipe moors this Malthus had taken on lease in the Tver province,
and how they were preserved, and of the carriages and dogcarts in
which the shooting party had been driven, and the luncheon pavilion
that had been rigged up at the marsh.
  "I don't understand you," said Levin, sitting up in the hay; "how is
it such people don't disgust you? I can understand a lunch with
Lafitte is all very pleasant, but don't you dislike just that very
sumptuousness? All these people, just like our tax farmers in the
old days, get their money in a way that gains them the contempt of
everyone. They don't care for their contempt, and then they use
their dishonest gains to buy off the contempt they have deserved."
  "Perfectly true!" chimed in Vassenka Veslovsky. "Perfectly!
Oblonsky, of course, goes out of bonhomie, but other people say:
'Well, Oblonsky stays with them.'"
  "Not a bit of it." Levin could hear that Oblonsky was smiling as
he spoke. "I simply don't consider him more dishonest than any other
wealthy merchant or nobleman. They've all made their money alike- by
their work and their intelligence."
  "Oh, by what work? Do you call it work to get hold of concessions
and speculate with them?"
  "Of course it's work. Work in this sense, that if it were not for
him and others like him, there would have been no railways."
  "But that's not work, like the work of a peasant, or in a learned
profession."
  "Granted, but it's work in the sense that his activity produces a
result- the railways. But of course you think the railways useless."
  "No, that's another question; I am disposed to admit that they're
useful. But all profit that is out of proportion to the labor expended
is dishonest."
  "But who is to define what is proportionate?"
  "Making profit by dishonest means, by trickery," said Levin,
conscious that he could not draw a distinct line between honesty and
dishonesty. "Such as banking, for instance," he went on. "It's an
evil- the amassing of huge fortunes without labor, just the same thing
as with the tax farmers- it's only the form that's changed. Le roi est
mort, vive le roi! No sooner were the tax farmers abolished than the
railways came up, and banking companies; that, too, is profit
without work."
  "Yes, that may all be very true and clever.... Lie down, Krak!"
Stepan Arkadyevich called to his dog, who was scratching and turning
over all the hay. He was obviously convinced of the correctness of his
position, and so talked serenely and without haste. "But you have
not drawn the line between honest and dishonest work. That I receive a
bigger salary than my chief clerk, though he knows more about the work
than I do- that's dishonest, I suppose?"
  "I can't say."
  "Well, but I can tell you: your receiving some five thousand,
let's say, for your work on the land, while our host, the peasant
here, however hard he works, can never get more than fifty roubles, is
just as dishonest as my earning more than my chief clerk, and
Malthus getting more than a railway expert. No, quite the contrary;
I see that society takes up a sort of antagonistic attitude to these
people, which is utterly baseless, and I fancy there's envy at the
bottom of it...."
  "No, that's unfair," said Veslovsky; "how could envy come in?
There is something unclean about that sort of business."
  "You say," Levin went on, "that it's unjust for me to receive five
thousand, while the peasant has fifty roubles; that's true. It is
unfair, and I feel it, but..."
  "It really is. Why is it we spend our time riding, drinking,
shooting, doing nothing while they are forever at work?" said Vassenka
Veslovsky, obviously for the first time in his life reflecting on
the question, and consequently considering it with perfect sincerity.
  "Yes, you feel it, but you don't give him your property," said
Stepan Arkadyevich, intentionally, as it seemed, provoking Levin.
  There had arisen of late something like a secret antagonism
between the two brothers-in-law; as though, since they had married
sisters, a kind of rivalry had sprung up between them as to which
was ordering his life best, and now this hostility showed itself in
the conversation, as it began to take a personal note.
  "I don't give it away, because no one demands that from me, and if I
wanted to, I could not give it away," answered Levin, "and have no one
to give it to."
  "Give it to this peasant, he would not refuse it."
  "Yes, but how am I to give it up? Am I to go to him and make a title
deed?"
  "I don't know; but if you are convinced that you have no right..."
  "I'm not at all convinced. On the contrary, I feel have no right
to give it up, that I have duties both to the land and to my family."
  "No, excuse me, but if you consider this inequality is unjust, why
is it you don't act accordingly?..."
  "Well, I do act negatively on that idea, so far as not trying to
increase the difference of position existing between him and me."
  "No, excuse me, that's a paradox."
  "Yes, there's something of a sophistry about that," Veslovsky
agreed. "Ah! Our host!" he said to the peasant who came into the barn,
opening the creaking door. "How is it you're not asleep yet?"
  "No, how's one to sleep! I thought our gentlemen would be asleep,
but I heard them chattering. I want to get a hook from here. She won't
bite?" he added, stepping cautiously with his bare feet.
  "And where are you going to sleep?"
  "We are going out for night watching."
  "Ah, what a night!" said Veslovsky, looking out at the edge of the
hut and the unharnessed droshky that could be seen in the faint
light of the evening glow in the great frame of the open doors. "But
listen, there are women's voices singing, and, on my word, not badly
too! Who's that singing, my friend?"
  "That's the housemaids from hard by here."
  "Let's go- let's take a walk! We shan't go to sleep, you know.
Oblonsky, come along!"
  "If one could only do both, lie here and go," answered Oblonsky,
stretching. "It's capital lying here."
  "Well, I shall go by myself," said Veslovsky, getting up eagerly,
and putting on his boots and stockings. "Good-by, gentlemen. If it's
fun, I'll fetch you. You've treated me to some good sport, and I won't
forget you."
  "He really is a capital fellow, isn't he?" said Stepan Arkadyevich
when Veslovsky had gone out and the peasant had closed the door
after him.
  "Yes, capital," answered Levin, still thinking of the subject of
their conversation just before. It seemed to him that he had clearly
expressed his thoughts and feelings to the best of his capacity, and
yet both of them, straightforward men and not fools, had said with one
voice that he was comforting himself with sophistries. This
disconcerted him.
  "It's just this, my dear boy. One must do one of two things:
either admit that the existing order of society is just, and then
stick up for one's rights in it; or acknowledge that you are
enjoying unjust privileges, as I do, and then enjoy them and be
satisfied."
  "No, if it were unjust, you could not enjoy these advantages and
be satisfied- at least I could not. The great thing for me is to
feel that I'm not to blame."
  "What do you say- why not go after all?" said Stepan Arkadyevich,
evidently weary of the strain of thought. "We shan't go to sleep,
you know. Come, let's go!"
  Levin did not answer. What they had said in the conversation that he
acted justly only in a negative sense absorbed his thoughts. "Can it
be that it's only possible to be just negatively?" he was asking
himself.
  "How strong the smell of the fresh hay is, though," said Stepan
Arkadyevich, getting up. "There's not a chance of sleeping. Vassenka
has been getting up some fun there. Do you hear the laughter and his
voice? Hadn't we better go? Come along!"
  "No, I'm not coming," answered Levin.
  "Surely that's not a matter of principle too," said Stepan
Arkadyevich, smiling, as he felt about in the dark for his cap.
  "It's not a matter of principle, but why should I go?"
  "But do you know you are preparing trouble for yourself," said
Stepan Arkadyevich, finding his cap and getting up.
  "How so?"
  "Do you suppose I don't see the line you've taken up with your wife?
I heard how it's a question of the greatest consequence, whether or
not you're to be away for a couple of days' shooting. That's all
very well as an idyllic episode, but for your whole life that won't
answer. A man must be independent; he has his masculine interests. A
man has to be manly," said Oblonsky, opening the door.
  "In what way? To go running after servant girls?" said Levin.
  "Why not, if it amuses him? Ca ne tire pas a consequence. It won't
do my wife any harm, and it'll amuse me. The great thing is to respect
the sanctity of the home. There should be nothing in the home. But
don't tie your own hands."
  "Perhaps so," said Levin dryly, and he turned on his side.
"Tomorrow, early, I want to go shooting, and I won't wake anyone,
and shall set off at daybreak."
  "Messieurs, venez vite!" they heard the voice of Veslovsky coming
back. "Charmante! I've made such a discovery. Charmante! A perfect
Gretchen, and I've already made friends with her. Really,
exceedingly pretty," he declared in a tone of approval, as though
she had been made pretty entirely on his account, and he were
expressing his satisfaction with the entertainment that had been
provided for him.
  Levin pretended to be asleep, while Oblonsky, putting on his
slippers, and lighting a cigar, walked out of the barn, and soon their
voices were lost.
  For a long while Levin could not get to sleep. He heard his horses
munching hay, then he heard the peasant and his elder boy getting
ready, and then going off for the night watching, then he heard the
soldier arranging his bed on the other side of the barn, with his
nephew, the younger son of their peasant host. He heard the boy in his
shrill little voice telling his uncle what he thought about the
dogs, who seemed to him huge and terrible creatures, and asking what
the dogs were going to hunt next day, and the soldier in a husky,
sleepy voice, telling him the sportsmen were going in the morning to
the marsh, and would shoot with their guns; and then, to check the
boy's questions, he said, "Go to sleep, Vaska; go to sleep or you'll
catch it," and soon after he began snoring himself, and everything was
still. He could only hear the neigh of the horses, and the guttural
cry of a snipe. "Is it really only negative? he repeated to himself.
"Well, what of it? It's not my fault." And he began thinking about the
next day.
  "Tomorrow I'll go out early, and I'll make a point of keeping
cool. There are lots of snipe; and there are double snipe too. When
I come back there'll be the note from Kitty. Yes, Stiva may be
right, I'm not manly with her, I'm tied to her apron strings.... Well,
it can't be helped! Negative again...."
  Half asleep, he heard the laughter and mirthful talk of Veslovsky
and Stepan Arkadyevich. For an instant he opened his eyes: the moon
was up, and in the open doorway, brightly lighted up by the moonlight,
they were standing talking. Stepan Arkadyevich was saying something of
the freshness of one girl, comparing her to a freshly peeled nut,
and Veslovsky with his infectious laugh was repeating some words,
probably said to him by a peasant: "Ah, you'd better get round your
own wife!" Levin, half asleep, said:
  "Gentlemen, tomorrow before daylight!" and fell asleep.
                             XII.

  Waking up at earliest dawn, Levin tried to wake his companions.
Vassenka, lying on his stomach, with one leg in a stocking thrust out,
was sleeping so soundly that he could elicit no response. Oblonsky,
half asleep, declined to get up so early. Even Laska, who was
asleep, curled up in the hay, got up unwillingly, and lazily stretched
out and straightened her hind legs one after the other. Getting on his
boots, taking his gun, and carefully opening the creaking door of
the barn, Levin went out into the road. The coachmen were sleeping
near their carriages; the horses were dozing. Only one was lazily
eating oats, scattering them in the manger when snorting. It was still
gray out-of-doors.
  "Why are you up so early, my dear?" the old woman, their hostess,
said, coming out of the hut and addressing him affectionately as an
old friend.
  "Going shooting, auntie. Do I go this way to the marsh?"
  "Straight out at the back; by our threshing floor, my dear, and hemp
patches; there's a little footpath."
  Stepping carefully with her sunburned, bare feet, the old woman
conducted Levin, and moved back the gate for him by the threshing
floor.
  "Straight ahead, and you'll come to the marsh. Our lads drove the
horses there yesterday evening."
  Laska ran eagerly forward along the little path. Levin followed
her with a light, rapid step, continually looking at the sky. He hoped
the sun would not be up before he reached the marsh. But the sun did
not delay. The moon, which had been bright when he went out, by now
shone only like a crescent of quicksilver. The rosy flush of dawn,
which one could not help seeing before, now had to be sought to be
discerned at all. What before had been undefined, vague blurs in the
distant countryside, could now be distinctly seen. They were sheaves
of rye. The dew, not visible till the sun was up, wetted Levin's
legs and his blouse above his belt in the high-growing, fragrant
hemp patch, from which the male plants had already been gathered in.
In the transparent stillness of morning the smallest sounds were
audible. A bee flew by Levin's ear with the whizzing sound of a
bullet. He looked carefully, and saw a second and a third. They were
all flying from the beehives behind the hedge, and they disappeared
over the hemp patch in the direction of the marsh. The path led
straight to the marsh. The marsh could be recognized by the mist which
rose from it, thicker in one place and thinner in another, so that the
sedge and willow bushes swayed like islands in this mist. At the
edge of the marsh and the road peasant boys and men, who had been
herding for the night, were lying, and in the dawn all were asleep
under their coats. Not far from them were three hobbled horses. One of
them clanked a chain. Laska walked beside her master, pressing a
little forward and looking round. Passing the sleeping peasants and
reaching the first reeds, Levin examined his percussion caps and
unleashed his dog. One of the horses, a sleek, dark-brown
three-year-old, seeing the dog, started away, switched its tail and
snorted. The other horses too were frightened, and splashing through
the water with their hobbled legs, and drawing their hoofs out of
the thick mud with a squelching sound, they bounded out of the
marsh. Laska stopped, looking ironically at the horses and inquiringly
at Levin. Levin patted Laska, and whistled as a sign that she might
begin.
  Laska ran joyfully and anxiously through the quagmire that quaked
under her.
  Running into the marsh among the familiar scents of roots, marsh
plants, and dross, and the extraneous smell of horse manure, Laska
detected at once a smell that pervaded the whole marsh, the scent of
that strong-smelling bird that always excited her more than any other.
Here and there among the moss and marsh plants this scent was very
strong, but it was impossible to determine in which direction it
grew stronger or fainter. To find the direction, she had to get
farther away from the wind. Not feeling the motion of her legs,
Laska bounded with a still gallop, so that at each bound she could
stop short, to the right, away from the wind that blew from the east
before sunrise, and turned facing the wind. Sniffing in the air with
dilated nostrils, she felt at once that not their traces only, but
they themselves, were here before her- not one, but many. Laska
slackened her speed. They were here, but where precisely she could not
yet determine. To find the very spot, she began to make a circle, when
suddenly her master's voice drew her off. "Laska! Here!" he said,
pointing her to a different direction. She stopped, asking him if
she had better not go on doing as she had begun. But he repeated his
command in an angry voice, pointing to a hummock spot covered with
water, where there could not be anything. She obeyed him, pretending
she was searching so as to please him, went round it, and went back to
her former position, and was at once aware of the scent again. Now
when he was not hindering her, she knew what to do, and, without
looking at what was under her feet, and to her vexation stumbling over
a hummock into the water, but righting herself with her strong, supple
legs, she began making the circuit which was to make all clear to her.
The scent of them reached her, stronger and stronger, and more and
more defined, and all at once it became perfectly clear to her that
one of them was here, behind this hummock, five paces in front of her;
she stopped, and her whole body was still and rigid. On her short legs
she could see nothing in front of her, but by the scent she knew it
was sitting not more than five paces off. She stood still, feeling
more and more conscious of it, and enjoying it in anticipation. Her
tail was stretched straight and tense, and only wagged at the
extreme tip. Her mouth was slightly open, her ears raised. One ear had
been turned wrong side out as she ran up, and she breathed heavily but
warily, and still more warily she turned around, but more with her
eyes than her head, to her master. He was coming along with the face
she knew so well, though the eyes were always terrible to her. He
stumbled over the hummocks as he came, and moved, as she thought,
extraordinarily slowly. She thought he came slowly, but he was
running.
  Noticing Laska's special attitude as she crouched on the ground,
as it were, scratching big prints with her hind paws, and with her
mouth slightly open, Levin knew she was pointing at double snipe,
and with an inward prayer for luck, especially with the first bird, he
ran up to her. Coming quite close up to her, he could from his
height look beyond her, and he saw with his eyes what she was seeing
with her nose. In a space between two little hummocks, at a couple
of yards' distance, he could see a double snipe. Turning its head,
it was listening. Then lightly preening and folding its wings, it
disappeared round a corner with a clumsy wag of its tail.
  "Fetch it, fetch it!" shouted Levin, giving Laska a shove from
behind.
  "But I can't go," thought Laska. "Where am I to go? From here I feel
them, but if I move forward I shall know nothing of where they are, or
who they are." But then he shoved her with his knee, and in an excited
whisper said, "Fetch it, Lassochka, fetch it."
  "Well, if that's what he wishes, I'll do it, but I can't answer
for myself now," she thought, and darted forward as fast as her legs
would carry her between the hummocks. She scented nothing now; she
could only see and hear, without understanding anything.
  Ten paces from her former place a double snipe rose with a
