speak of a greater allowance of air. “Are you still in prison, or are you free? If you want food, and if 
you want to go on with this silly adventure — it’s yours after all and not mine — you had better slap 
your arms and rub your legs and try and help me get the others out while there is a chance!” 

Thorin of course saw the sense of this, so after a few more groans he got up and helped the hobbit 
as well as he could. In the darkness floundering in the cold water they had a difficult and very nasty 
job finding which were the right barrels. Knocking outside and calling only discovered about six 
dwarves that could answer. These were unpacked and helped ashore where they sat or lay muttering 
and moaning; they were so soaked and bruised and cramped that they could hardly yet realize their 
release or be properly thankful for it. 

Dwalin and Balin were two of the most unhappy, and it was no good asking them to help. Bifur and 
Bofur were less knocked about and drier, but they lay down and would do nothing. Fili and Kili, 
however, who were young (for dwarves) and had also been packed more neatly with plenty of straw 
into smaller casks, came out more or less smiling, with only a bruise or two and a stiffness that soon 
wore off. 

“I hope I never smell the smell of apples again!” said Fili. “My tub was full of it. To smell apples 
everlastingly when you can scarcely move and are cold and sick with hunger is maddening. I could eat 
anything in the wide world now, for hours on end — but not an apple!” 

With the willing help of Fili and Kili, Thorin and Bilbo at last discovered the remainder of the 
company and got them out. Poor fat Bombur was asleep or senseless; Dori, Nori, Ori, Oin and Gloin 
were waterlogged and seemed only half alive; they all had to be carried one by one and laid helpless 
on the shore. 

“Well! Here we are!” said Thorin. “And I suppose we ought to thank our stars and Mr. Baggins. I 
am sure he has a right to expect it, though I wish he could have arranged a more comfortable journey. 
Still — all very much at your service once more, Mr. Baggins. No doubt we shall feel properly grateful, 
when we are fed and recovered. In the meanwhile what next?” 

“I suggest Lake-town,” said Bilbo. “What else is there?” 

Nothing else could, of course, be suggested; so leaving the others Thorin and Fili and Kili and the 
hobbit went along the shore to the great bridge. There were guards at the head of it, but they were not 
keeping very careful watch, for it was so long since there had been any real need. Except for 
occasional squabbles about river-tolls they were friends with the Wood-elves. Other folk were far 



away; and some of the younger people in the town openly doubted the existence of any dragon in the 
mountain, and laughed at the greybeards and gammers who said that they had seen him flying in the 
sky in their young days. That being so it is not surprising that the guards were drinking and laughing 
by a fire in their hut, and did not hear the noise of the unpacking of the dwarves or the footsteps of the 
four scouts. Their astonishment was enormous when Thorin Oakenshield stepped in through the door. 

“Who are you and what do you want?” they shouted leaping to their feet and groping for weapons. 

“Thorin son of Thrain son of Thror King under the Mountain!” said the dwarf in a loud voice, and 
he looked it, in spite of his torn clothes and draggled hood. The gold gleamed on his neck and waist; 
his eyes were dark and deep. “I have come back. I wish to see the Master of your town!” 

Then there was tremendous excitement. Some of the more foolish ran out of the hut as if they 
expected the Mountain to go golden in the night and all the waters of the lake turn yellow right away. 
The captain of the guard came forward. 

“And who are these?” he asked, pointing to Fili and Kili and Bilbo. 

“The sons of my father’s daughter,” answered Thorin, “Fili and Kili of the race of Durin, and Mr. 
Baggins who has travelled with us out of the West.” 

“If you come in peace lay down your arms!” said the captain. 

“We have none,” said Thorin, and it was true enough: their knives had been taken from them by the 
wood-elves, and the great sword Orcrist too. Bilbo had his short sword, hidden as usual, but he said 
nothing about that. “We have no need of weapons, who return at last to our own as spoken of old. Nor 
could we fight against so many. Take us to your master!” 

“He is at feast,” said the captain. 

“Then all the more reason for taking us to him,” burst in Fili, who was getting impatient at these 
solemnities. “We are worn and famished after our long road and we have sick comrades. Now make 
haste and let us have no more words, or your master may have something to say to you.” 

“Follow me then,” said the captain, and with six men about them he led them over the bridge 
through the gates and into the market-place of the town. This was a wide circle of quiet water 
surrounded by the tall piles on which were built the greater houses, and by long wooden quays with 
many steps and ladders going down to the surface of the lake. From one great hall shone many lights 
and there came the sound of many voices. They passed its doors and stood blinking in the light 
looking at long tables filled with folk. 

“I am Thorin son of Thrain son of Thror King under the Mountain! I return!” cried Thorin in a loud 
voice from the door, before the captain could say anything. 

All leaped to their feet. The Master of the town sprang from his great chair. But none rose in 
greater surprise than the raft-men of the elves who were sitting at the lower end of the hall. Pressing 
forward before the Master’s table they cried: 

“These are prisoners of our king that have escaped, wandering vagabond dwarves that could not 
give any good account of themselves, sneaking through the woods and molesting our people!” 

“Is this true?” asked the Master. As a matter of fact he thought it far more likely than the return of 
the King under the Mountain, if any such person had ever existed. 

“It is true that we were wrongfully waylaid by the Elvenking and imprisoned without cause as we 
journeyed back to our own land,” answered Thorin. “But lock nor bar may hinder the homecoming 
spoken of old. Nor is this town in the Wood-elves’ realm. I speak to the Master of the town of the Men 
of the Lake, not to the raft-men of the king.” 

Then the Master hesitated and looked from one to the other. The Elvenking was very powerful in 
those parts and the Master wished for no enmity with him, nor did he think much of old songs, giving 



his mind to trade and tolls, to cargoes and gold, to which habit he owed his position. Others were of 
different mind, however, and quickly the matter was settled without him. The news had spread from 
the doors of the hall like fire through all the town. People were shouting inside the hall and outside it. 
The quays were thronged with hurrying feet. Some began to sing snatches of old songs concerning the 
return of the King under the Mountain; that it was Thror’s grandson not Thror himself that had come 
back did not bother them at all. Others took up the song and it rolled loud and high over the lake. 


The King beneath the mountains, 
The King of carven stone, 

The lord of silver fountains 
Shall come into his own! 


His crown shall be upholden, 
His harp shall be restrung, 
His halls shall echo golden 
To songs of yore re-sung. 


The woods shall wave on mountains 
And grass beneath the sun; 

His wealth shall flow in fountains 
And the rivers golden run. 


The streams shall run in gladness, 
The lakes shall shine and burn, 
All sorrow fail and sadness 
At the Mountain-king’s return! 


So they sang, or very like that, only there was a great deal more of it, and there was much shouting 
as well as the music of harps and of fiddles mixed up with it. Indeed such excitement had not been 
known in the town in the memory of the oldest grandfather. The Wood-elves themselves began to 
wonder greatly and even to be afraid. They did not know of course how Thorin had escaped, and they 
began to think their king might have made a serious mistake. As for the Master he saw there was 
nothing else for it but to obey the general clamour, for the moment at any rate, and to pretend to 
believe that Thorin was what he said. So he gave up to him his own great chair and set Fili and Kili 
beside him in places of honour. Even Bilbo was given a seat at the high table, and no explanation of 
where he came in — no songs had alluded to him even in the obscurest way — was asked for in the 
general bustle. 

Soon afterwards the other dwarves were brought into the town amid scenes of astonishing 
enthusiasm. They were all doctored and fed and housed and pampered in the most delightful and 
satisfactory fashion. A large house was given up to Thorin and his company; boats and rowers were 
put at their service; and crowds sat outside and sang songs all day, or cheered if any dwarf showed so 
much as his nose. 



Some of the songs were old ones; but some of them were quite new and spoke confidently of the 
sudden death of the dragon and of cargoes of rich presents coming down the river to Lake-town. These 
were inspired largely by the Master and they did not particularly please the dwarves, but in the 
meantime they were well contented and they quickly grew fat and strong again. Indeed within a week 
they were quite recovered, fitted out in fine cloth of their proper colours, with beards combed and 
trimmed, and proud steps. Thorin looked and walked as if his kingdom was already regained and 
Smaug chopped up into little pieces. 

Then, as he had said, the dwarves’ good feeling towards the little hobbit grew stronger every day. 
There were no more groans or grumbles. They drank his health, and they patted him on the back, and 
they made a great fuss of him; which was just as well, for he was not feeling particularly cheerful. He 
had not forgotten the look of the Mountain, nor the thought of the dragon, and he had besides a 
shocking cold. For three days he sneezed and coughed, and he could not go out, and even after that his 
speeches at banquets were limited to “Thag you very buch.” 


In the meanwhile the Wood-elves had gone back up the Forest River with their cargoes, and there was 
great excitement in the king’s palace. I have never heard what happened to the chief of the guards and 
the butler. Nothing of course was ever said about keys or barrels while the dwarves stayed in Lake- 
town, and Bilbo was careful never to become invisible. Still, I daresay, more was guessed than was 
known, though doubtless Mr. Baggins remained a bit of a mystery. In any case the king knew now the 
dwarves’ errand, or thought he did, and he said to himself: 

“Very well! We’ll see! No treasure will come back through Mirkwood without my having 
something to say in the matter. But I expect they will all come to a bad end, and serve them right!” He 
at any rate did not believe in dwarves fighting and killing dragons like Smaug, and he strongly 
suspected attempted burglary or something like it — which shows he was a wise elf and wiser than the 
men of the town, though not quite right, as we shall see in the end. He sent out his spies about the 
shores of the lake and as far northward towards the Mountain as they would go, and waited. 

At the end of a fortnight Thorin began to think of departure. While the enthusiasm still lasted in the 
town was the time to get help. It would not do to let everything cool down with delay. So he spoke to 
the Master and his councillors and said that soon he and his company must go on towards the 
Mountain. 

Then for the first time the Master was surprised and a little frightened; and he wondered if Thorin 
was after all really a descendant of the old kings. He had never thought that the dwarves would 
actually dare to approach Smaug, but believed they were frauds who would sooner or later be 
discovered and be turned out. He was wrong. Thorin, of course, was really the grandson of the King 
under the Mountain, and there is no knowing what a dwarf will not dare and do for revenge or the 
recovery of his own. 

But the Master was not sorry at all to let them go. They were expensive to keep, and their arrival 
had turned things into a long holiday in which business was at a standstill. “Let them go and bother 
Smaug, and see how he welcomes them!” he thought. “Certainly, O Thorin Thrain’s son Thror’s son!” 
was what he said. “You must claim your own. The hour is at hand, spoken of old. What help we can 
offer shall be yours, and we trust to your gratitude when your kingdom is regained.” 

So one day, although autumn was now getting far on, and winds were cold, and leaves were falling 
fast, three large boats left Lake-town, laden with rowers, dwarves, Mr. Baggins, and many provisions. 



Horses and ponies had been sent round by circuitous paths to meet them at their appointed landing- 
place. The Master and his councillors bade them farewell from the great steps of the town-hall that 
went down to the lake. People sang on the quays and out of windows. The white oars dipped and 
splashed, and off they went north up the lake on the last stage of their long journey. The only person 
thoroughly unhappy was Bilbo. 



Chapter XI 


ON THE DOORSTEP 


In two days going they rowed right up the Long Lake and passed out into the River Running, and now 
they could all see the Lonely Mountain towering grim and tall before them. The stream was strong and 
their going slow. At the end of the third day, some miles up the river, they drew in to the left or 
western bank and disembarked. Here they were joined by the horses with other provisions and 
necessaries and the ponies for their own use that had been sent to meet them. They packed what they 
could on the ponies and the rest was made into a store under a tent, but none of the men of the town 
would stay with them even for the night so near the shadow of the Mountain. 

“Not at any rate until the songs have come true!” said they. It was easier to believe in the Dragon 
and less easy to believe in Thorin in these wild parts. Indeed their stores had no need of any guard, for 
all the land was desolate and empty. So their escort left them, making off swiftly down the river and 
the shoreward paths, although the night was already drawing on. 

They spent a cold and lonely night and their spirits fell. The next day they set out again. Balin and 
Bilbo rode behind, each leading another pony heavily laden beside him; the others were some way 
ahead picking out a slow road, for there were no paths. They made north-west, slanting away from the 
River Running, and drawing ever nearer and nearer to a great spur of the Mountain that was flung out 
southwards towards them. 

It was a weary journey, and a quiet and stealthy one. There was no laughter or song or sound of 
harps, and the pride and hopes which had stirred in their hearts at the singing of old songs by the lake 
died away to a plodding gloom. They knew that they were drawing near to the end of their journey, 
and that it might be a very horrible end. The land about them grew bleak and barren, though once, as 
Thorin told them, it had been green and fair. There was little grass, and before long there was neither 
bush nor tree, and only broken and blackened stumps to speak of ones long vanished. They were come 
to the Desolation of the Dragon, and they were come at the waning of the year. 


They reached the skirts of the Mountain all the same without meeting any danger or any sign of the 
Dragon other than the wilderness he had made about his lair. The Mountain lay dark and silent before 
them and ever higher above them. They made their first camp on the western side of the great southern 
spur, which ended in a height called Ravenhill. On this there had been an old watch-post; but they 
dared not climb it yet, it was too exposed. 

Before setting out to search the western spurs of the Mountain for the hidden door, on which all 
their hopes rested, Thorin sent out a scouting expedition to spy out the land to the South where the 
Front 

Gate stood. For this purpose he chose Balin and Fili and Kili, and with them went Bilbo. They 
marched under the grey and silent cliffs to the feet of Ravenhill. There the river, after winding a wide 
loop over the valley of Dale, turned from the Mountain on its road to the Lake, flowing swift and 
noisily. Its bank was bare and rocky, tall and steep above the stream; and gazing out from it over the 


narrow water, foaming and splashing among many boulders, they could see in the wide valley 
shadowed by the Mountain’s arms the grey ruins of ancient houses, towers, and walls. 

“There lies all that is left of Dale,” said Balin. “The mountain’s sides were green with woods and 
all the sheltered valley rich and pleasant in the days when the bells rang in that town.” He looked both 
sad and grim as he said this: he had been one of Thorin’s companions on the day the Dragon came. 

They did not dare to follow the river much further towards the Gate; but they went on beyond the 
end of the southern spur, until lying hidden behind a rock they could look out and see the dark 
cavernous opening in a great cliff -wall between the arms of the Mountain. Out of it the waters of the 
Running River sprang; and out of it too there came a steam and a dark smoke. Nothing moved in the 
waste, save the vapour and the water, and every now and again a black and ominous crow. The only 
sound was the sound of the stony water, and every now and again the harsh croak of a bird. Balin 
shuddered. 

“Let us return!” he said. “We can do no good here! And I don’t like these dark birds, they look like 
spies of evil.” 




The Front Gate. 


“The dragon is still alive and in the halls under the Mountain then — or I imagine so from the 





smoke,” said the hobbit. 

“That does not prove it,” said Balin, “though I don’t doubt you are right. But he might be gone 
away some time, or he might be lying out on the mountain-side keeping watch, and still I expect 
smokes and steams would come out of the gates: all the halls within must be filled with his foul reek.” 


With such gloomy thoughts, followed ever by croaking crows above them, they made their weary way 
back to the camp. Only in June they had been guests in the fair house of Elrond, and though autumn 
was now crawling towards winter that pleasant time now seemed years ago. They were alone in the 
perilous waste without hope of further help. They were at the end of their journey, but as far as ever, it 
seemed, from the end of their quest. None of them had much spirit left. 

Now strange to say Mr. Baggins had more than the others. He would often borrow Thorin’s map 
and gaze at it, pondering over the runes and the message of the moon-letters Elrond had read. It was he 
that made the dwarves begin the dangerous search on the western slopes for the secret door. They 
moved their camp then to a long valley, narrower than the great dale in the South where the Gates of 
the river stood, and walled with lower spurs of the Mountain. Two of these here thrust forward west 
from the main mass in long steep-sided ridges that fell ever downwards towards the plain. On this 
western side there were fewer signs of the dragon’s marauding feet, and there was some grass for their 
ponies. From this western camp, shadowed all day by cliff and wall until the sun began to sink towards 
the forest, day by day they toiled in parties searching for paths up the mountain-side. If the map was 
true, somewhere high above the cliff at the valley’s head must stand the secret door. Day by day they 
came back to their camp without success. 

But at last unexpectedly they found what they were seeking. Fili and Kili and the hobbit went back 
one day down the valley and scrambled among the tumbled rocks at its southern corner. About 
midday, creeping behind a great stone that stood alone like a pillar, Bilbo came on what looked like 
rough steps going upwards. Following these excitedly he and the dwarves found traces of a narrow 
track, often lost, often rediscovered, that wandered on to the top of the southern ridge and brought 
them at last to a still narrower ledge, which turned north across the face of the Mountain. Booking 
down they saw that they were at the top of the cliff at the valley’s head and were gazing down on to 
their own camp below. Silently, clinging to the rocky wall on their right, they went in single file along 
the ledge, till the wall opened and they turned into a little steep-walled bay, grassy-floored, still and 
quiet. Its entrance which they had found could not be seen from below because of the overhang of the 
cliff, nor from further off because it was so small that it looked like a dark crack and no more. It was 
not a cave and was open to the sky above; but at its inner end a flat wall rose up that in the lower part, 
close to the ground, was as smooth and upright as masons’ work, but without a joint or crevice to be 
seen. No sign was there of post or lintel or threshold, nor any sign of bar or bolt or key-hole; yet they 
did not doubt that they had found the door at last. 

They beat on it, they thrust and pushed at it, they implored it to move, they spoke fragments of 
